Acts of Resistance Acts of Resistance 
Against the New Myths of our Time 
Pierre Bourdieu 
Translated by Richard Nice 
Polity Press English translation © Polity Press and The New Press 1998 
First published in France as Contre-feux © Editions Liber-Raisons d'Agir 1998 
First Published in 1998 by Polity Press in association with Blackwell Publishers 
Ltd 
Reprinted 2000 
Editorial office: 
Polity Press 
65 Bridge Street 
Cambridge CB2 I UR, UK 
Marketing and production: 
Blackwell Publishers Ltd 
108 Cowley Road 
Oxford OX4 lJF, UK 
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purposes of 
criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of 
the publisher. 
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition 
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or 
otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or 
cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition 
including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser. 
ISBN 0-7456-2217-8 
ISBN 0-7456-2218-6 (pbk) 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
Typeset in lion 13 pt Bodoni 
by Ace Filmsetting Ltd, Frome, Somerset 
Printed in Great Britain by T. J. International, Padstow, Cornwall 
This book is printed on acid-free paper. Contents 
To the Reader 
The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 
Sollers tel quel 
The Status of Foreigners: a Shibboleth 
Abuse of Power by the Advocates of Reason 
The Train Driver's Remark 
Against the Destruction of a Civilization 
The Myth of 'Globalization' and the European 
Welfare State 
The Thoughts of Chairman Tietmeyer 
Social Scientists, Economic Science and the 
Social Movement 
For a New Internationalism 
Return to Television 
The Government Finds the People Irresponsible Vll 
1 
11 
15 
19 
21 
24 
29 
45 
52 
60 
70 
78 Job Insecurity is Everywhere Now 
The Protest Movement of the Unemployed, 
a Social Miracle 
The Negative Intellectual 
Neo-liberalism, the Utopia (Becoming a Reality) 
of Unlimited Exploitation 
References 81 
88 
91 
94 
106 To the Reader 
The texts that follow were written or spoken as contributions 
to movements and moments of resistance, and it is because I 
believe that the dangers that provoked them are neither isolated 
nor occasional that I decided to bring them together for 
publication. Although they are more exposed than methodi­
cally controlled texts to the inconsistencies stemming from the 
diversity of circumstances, I hope that they can still provide 
useful weapons to all those who are striving to resist the scourge 
of neo-liberalism.l 
I do not have much inclination for prophetic interventions 
and I have always been wary of occasions in which the situation 
or a sense of solidarity could lead me to overstep the limits of 
my competence. So I would not have engaged in public position­
taking if I had not, each time, had the -perhaps illusory -sense 
of being forced into it by a kind of legitimate rage, sometimes 
close to something like a sense of duty. 
The ideal of the collective intellectual, to which I have tried 
to conform whenever I could make common cause with others 
on some particular point, is not always easy to put into effect.2 
And if, to be effective, I have sometimes had to commit myself VIII To the Reader 
in my own person and my own name, I have always done it in 
the hope -if not of triggering a mobilization, or even one of 
those debates without object or subject which arise periodic ally 
in the world of the media - at least of breaking the appearance 
of unanimity which is the greater part of the symbolic force of 
the dominant discourse. 
Notes 
1 At the risk of increasing the number of breaks in tone and style 
resulting from the diversity of situations, I have presented 
this selection of articles and contributions here in their 
chronological order, so as to make clearer the historical 
context of remarks which, though they are not reducible to 
a given context, make no concessions to the vague and wordy 
generalities of what is sometimes called 'political philosophy'. 
I have added here and there some basic references to enable 
the reader to explore further the argument that is put 
forward. 
2 From all my collective interventions, in particular those of the 
Association de Reflexion sur les Enseignements Superieurs et 
la Recherche (ARESER), the Comite International de Soutien 
aux Intellectuels Algeriens (CISA) and the International 
Parliament of Writers (with which I no longer feel affinities), 
I have chosen only the article published in Liberation, here 
entitled 'The status of foreigners: a shibboleth" with the 
agreement of my co-authors, both visible (Jean-Pierre Alaux) 
and invisible (Christophe Daadouch, Marc-Antoine Levy and 
Daniele Lochak), victims of the censorship quite spontan­
eously and routinely exercised by the journalists responsible 
for the so-called tribunes libres in the newspapers. Always in To the Reader lX 
pursuit of the symbolic capital associated with certain names, 
they do not like articles signed with the name of a group, or 
bearing several names -this is one of the obstacles, and a 
significant one, to the constitution of a collective intellectual 
-and they tend to remove the names they do not recognize, 
either after negotiation or, as happened there, without 
consultation. The Left Hand and the 
Right Hand of the State 
Q A recent issue of the journal that you edit was devoted to the 
theme of suffering.] It includes several interviews with people whose 
voices are not much heard in the media: young people on deprived 
estates, small farmers, social workers. The head-teacher of a 
secondar y school in difficulty, for exam ple, expresses his bitterness. 
Instead of overseein g the transmission of know ledge, he has become, 
against his will, the superintendent of a kind of police station. Do 
you think that individual and anecdotal testimonies of that kind can 
cast light on a collecti ve malaise? 
PB In the survey we are conducting on social suffering, we 
encounter many people who, like that head-teacher, are caught 
in the contradictions of the social world, which are experienced 
in the form of personal dramas. I could also cite the project 
leader, responsible for coordinating all the work on a 'difficult 
estate' in a small town in northern France. He is faced with 
contradictions which are the extreme case of those currently 
Interview with R. P. Droit and T. Ferenczi, published in Le Monde, 14 Jan. 
1992. 2 The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 
experienced by all those who are called 'social workers': family 
counsellors, youth leaders, rank-and-file magistrates, and also, 
increasingly, secondary and primary teachers. They constitute 
what I call the left hand of the state, the set of agents of the 
so-called spending ministries which are the trace, within the 
state, of the social struggles of the past. They are opposed to the 
right hand of the state, the technocrats of the Ministry of 
Finance, the public and private banks and the ministerial 
cabinets. A number of social struggles that we are now seeing 
(and will see) express the revolt of the minor state nobility 
against the senior state nobility .2 
Q How do you explain that exasperation, those forms of despair 
and those revolts? 
PH I think that the left hand of the state has the sense that 
the right hand no longer knows, or, worse, no longer really wants 
to know what the left hand does. In any case, it does not want 
to pay for it. One of the main reasons for all these people's 
despair is that the state has withdrawn, or is withdraw ing, from 
a number of sectors of social life for which it was previously 
responsible: social housing, public service broadcas ting, schools, 
hospitals, etc., which is all the more stupefying and scandalous, 
in some of these areas at least, because it was done by a Socialist 
government, which might at least be expected to be the 
guarantor of public service as an open service available to all, 
without distinction ... What is described as a crisis of politics, 
anti-parliamentarianism, is in reality despair at the failure of 
the state as the guardian of the public interest. 
If the Socialists had simply not been as socialist as they 
claimed, that would not shock anyone -times are hard and 
there is not much room for manoeuvre. But what is more The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 3 
surprising is that they should have done so much to undermine 
the public interest, first by their deeds, with all kinds of 
measures and policies (I will only mention the media ... ) aimed 
at liquidating the gains of the welfare state, and above all, 
perhaps, in their words, with the eulogy of private enterprise (as 
if one could only be enterprising within an enterprise) and the 
encouragement of private interest. All that is somewhat 
shocking, especially for those who are sent into the front line to 
perform so-called 'social' work to compensate for the most 
flagrant inadequacies of the logic of the market, without being 
given the means to really do their job. How could they not have 
the sense of being constantly undermined or betrayed? 
It should have been clear a long time ago that their revolt 
goes far beyond questions of salary, even if the salary granted 
is an unequivocal index of the value placed on the work and the 
correspon ding workers. Contempt for a job is shown first of all 
in the more or less derisory remuneration it is given. 
Q Do you think that the politicians' room for manoeuvre is really 
so limited? 
PH It is no doubt less limited than they would have us think. 
And in any case there remains one area where governments have 
considerable scope: that of the symbolic. Exemplary behaviour 
ought to be de rigueur for all state personnel, especially when 
they claim to belong to a tradition of commitment to the 
interests of the least advantaged. But it is difficult not to have 
doubts when one sees not only examples of corruption (some­
times quasi-official, with the bonuses given to some senior civil 
servants) or betrayal of public service (that word is no doubt too 
strong -1 am thinking of pantou flage3) and all the forms of 
misappropriation, for private purposes, of public property, 4 The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 
profits or services -nepotism, cronyism (our leaders have many 
'personal friends' ... 4), clientelism ... 
And I have not even mentioned symbolic profits! Television 
has probably contributed as much as bribery to the degradation 
of civic virtue. It has invited and projected on to the political 
and intellectual stage a set of self-promoting personalities 
concerned above all to get themselves noticed and admired, in 
total contradiction with the values of unspectacular devotion to 
the collective interest which once characterized the civil servant 
or the activist. It is the same self-serving attention seeking 
(often at the expense of rivals) which explains why 'headline 
grabbing'S has become such a common practice. For many 
ministers, it seems, a measure is only valid if it can be announced 
and regarded as achieved as soon as it has been made public. In 
short, large-scale corruption which causes a scandal when it is 
uncovered because it reveals the gap between prof essed virtues 
and real behaviour is simply the extreme case of all the ordinary 
little 'weakness es', the flaunting of luxury and the avid 
acceptance of material or symbolic privileges. 
Q Faced with the situation you descr ibe, how, in your view, do 
the citizens react? 
PB I was recently reading an article by a German author on 
ancient Egypt. He shows how, in a period of crisis of confidence 
in the state and in the public good, two tendencies emerged: 
among the rulers, corruption, linked to the decline in respect for 
the public interest; and, among those they dominated, personal 
religiosity, associated with despair concerning temporal rem­
edies. In the same way, one has the sense now that citizens, 
feeling themselves ejected from the state (which, in the end, asks 
of them no more than obligatory material contributions, and The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 5 
certainly no commitment, no enthusiasm), reject the state, 
treating it as an alien power to be used so far as they can to serve 
their own interests. 
Q You referred to the considerable scope that governments have 
in the symbolic domain. This is not just a matter of setting an 
example of good behaviour. It is also about words, ideals that can 
mobilize people. How do you explain the current vacuum? 
PB There has been much talk of the silence of the intellectuals. 
What strikes me is the silence of the politicians. They are terribly 
short of ideals that can mobilize people. This is probably because 
the professionalization of politics and the conditions required of 
those who want to make a career in the parties increasingly 
exclude inspired personalities. And probably also because the 
definition of political activity has changed with the arrival of a 
political class that has learned in its schools (of political science) 
that, to appear serious, or simply to avoid appearing old­
fashioned or archaic, it is better to talk of management than self­
management, and that they must, at any rate, take on the 
appearances (that is to say the language) of economic rationality. 
Locked in the narrow, short-term economism of the IMF 
world view which is also causing havoc, and will continue to do 
so, in North-South relations, all these half-wise economists fail, 
of course, to take account of the real costs, in the short and more 
especially the long term, of the material and psychological 
wretchedness which is the only certain outcome of their 
economica lly legitimate Realpolitik: delinquency, crime, alco­
holism, road accidents, etc. Here too, the right hand, obsessed 
by the question of financial equilibrium, knows nothing of the 
problems of the left hand, confronted with the often very costly 
social consequences of 'budgetary restrictions'. 6 The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 
Q Are the values on which the actions and contributions of the 
state were once founded no longer credible? 
PB The first people to flout them are often the very ones who 
ought to be their guardians . The Rennes Congress6 and the 
amnesty law7 did more to discredit the Socialists than ten years 
of anti-socialist campaig ning. And a 'turncoat' activist does 
more harm than ten opponents. But ten years of Socialist 
governmen t have completed the demolition of belief in the state 
and the demolition of the welfare state that was started in the 
1970s in the name of liberalism. I am thinking in particular of 
housing policy.8 The declared aim has been to rescue the petite 
bourgeoisie from publicly owned housing (and thereby from 
'collectivism') and facilitate their move into ownership of a 
house or apartment. This policy has in a sense succeeded only 
too well. Its outcome illustrates what I said a moment ago about 
the social costs of some economi es. That policy is probably the 
major cause of social segregation and consequen tly of the 
problems referred to as those of the 'banlieues'. 9 
Q So if one wants to define an ideal, it would be a return to the 
sense of the state and of the public good . You don't share everybody's 
opinion on this. 
PB Whose opinion is everybody's opinion? The opmIOn of 
people who write in the newspapers, intellectuals who advocate 
the 'minimal state' and who are rather too quick to 
bury the notion of the public and the public's interest in the 
public interest ... We see there a typical example of the effect 
of shared belief which removes from discussion ideas which 
are perfectly worth discussing. One would need to analyse the 
work of the 'new intellectuals', which has created a climate The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 7 
favourable to the withdrawal of the state and, more broadly, to 
submission to the values of the economy. I'm thinking 
of what has been called the 'return of individualism', a kind of 
self-fulfilling prophecy which tends to destroy the philosophical 
foundations of the welfare state and in particular the notion of 
collective responsibility (towards industrial accidents, sickness 
or poverty) which has been a fundamental achievement of social 
(and sociological) thought. The return to the individual is also 
what makes it possible to 'blame the victim', who is entirely 
responsible for his or her own misfortune, and to preach the 
gospel of self-help, all of this being justified by the endlessly 
repeated need to reduce costs for companies. 
The reaction of retrospective panic provoked by the crisis of 
1968, a symbolic revolution which alarmed all the small holders 
of cultural capital (subsequently reinforced by the unforeseen 
collapse of the Soviet-style regimes), created conditions favour­
able to a cultural restoration, the outcome of which has been that 
'Sciences-Po thought'lO has replaced the 'thought of Chairman 
Mao'. The intellectual world is now the site of a struggle aimed 
at producing and imposing 'new intellectuals', and therefore a 
new definition of the intellectual and the intellectual's political 
role, a new definition of philosophy and the philosopher, 
henceforward engaged in the vague debates of a political 
philosophy without technical content, a social science reduced to 
journalistic commentary for election nights, and uncritical 
glossing of unscientific opinion polls. Plato had a wonderful word 
for all these people: doxoso phers . These 'technicians of opinion 
who think themselves wise' (I'm translating the triple meaning 
of the word) pose the problems of politics in the very same terms 
in which they are posed by businessmen, politicians and political 
journalists (in other words the very people who can afford to 
commission surveys ... ). 8 The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 
Q You have just mentioned Plato. Is the attitude of the sociologist 
close to that of the philosopher? 
PB The sociologist is opposed to the doxosopher, like the philo­
sopher, in that she questions the things that are self-evident, in 
particular those that present themselves in the form of questions , 
her own as much as other people's. This profoundly shocks the 
doxosopher, who sees a political bias in the refusal to grant the 
profoundly political submission implied in the unconscious 
acceptance of commonplaces, in Aristotle's sense -notions or 
theses with which people argue, but over which they do not argue. 
Q Don't you tend in a sense to put the sociologist in the place of 
a philosopher-king? 
PB What I defend above all is the possibility and the necessity 
of the critical intellectual, who is firstly critical of the intellec­
tual doxa secreted by the doxosophers. There is no genuine 
democracy without genuine opposing critical powers. The 
intellectual is one of those, of the first magnitude. That is why 
I think that the work of demolishing the critical intellectual, 
living or dead -Marx, Nietzsche, Sartre, Foucault, and some 
others who are grouped together under the label Pensee 68!l -
is as dangerous as the demol ition of the public interest and that 
it is part of the same process of restoration. 
Of course I would prefer it if intellectuals had all, and always, 
lived up to the immense historical responsibility they bear and 
if they had always invested in their actions not only their moral 
authority but also their intellectual competence -like, to cite 
just one example, Pierre Vidal-Naquet, who has engaged all his 
mastery of historical method in a critique of the abuses of 
history.12 Having said that, in the words of Karl Kraus, 'between The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 9 
two evils, I refuse to choose the lesser.' While I have little 
indulgence for 'irresponsible' intellectuals, I have even less 
respect for the 'intellectuals' of the political-administrative 
establishment, polymorphous polygraphs who polish their an­
nual essays between two meetings of boards of directors, three 
publishers' parties and miscellaneous television appearances. 
Q So what role would you want to see for intellectuals, especiall y 
in the construction of Euro pe? 
PB I would like writers, artists, philosophers and scientists to 
be able make their voice heard directly in all the areas of public 
life in which they are competent. I think that everyone would 
have a lot to gain if the logic of intellectual life, that of argument 
and refutation, were extended to public life. At present, it is 
often the logic of political life, that of denunciation and slander, 
'sloganization' and falsification of the adversary's thought, 
which extends into intellectual life. It would be a good thing if 
the 'creators' could fulfil their function of public service and 
sometimes of public salvation. 
Moving to the level of Europe simply means rising to a higher 
degree of universalization, reaching a new stage on the road to 
a universal state, which, even in intellectual life, is far from 
having been achieved. We will certainly not have gained much 
if eurocentrism is substituted for the wounded nationalisms of 
the old imperial nations. Now that the great utopias of the 
nineteenth century have revealed all their perversion, it is 
urgent to create the conditions for a collective effort to 
reconstruct a universe of realist ideals, capable of mobilizing 
people's will without mystifying their consciousness. 
Paris, December 1991 10 The Left Hand and the Right Hand of the State 
Notes 
I Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Social es, 90, Dec. 1991, special 
issue 'La souffrance'; Bourdieu et aI., La Misere du monde. 
2 Alluding to the author's book The State Nobility: Elite 
Schools in the Field of Power (trans.). 
3 The practice whereby civil servants move to positions in the 
private sector (trans.). 
4 Fraw;ois Mitterrand (President of France 1981-1995) was often 
praised for his 'fidelite en amitie', and a number of personalities 
appointed to important posts were, according to the news­
papers, chiefly noted for being his 'personal friends' (trans.). 
5 effets d'annonce in the original, produced when a minister 
reduces his political action to the ostentatious announcement 
of spectacular decisions which often have no effect or no 
follow-up -Jack Lang has been cited as an example (trans.). 
6 The Rennes Congress (I5- 18 March 1990), the scene of 
heated disputes between the leaders of the major tendencies 
within the Socialist Party, Lionel Jospin, Laurent Fabius 
and Michel Rocard (trans.). 
7 The amnesty that was granted, in particular, to the generals 
of the French army in Algeria who attempted a putsch 
against de Gaulle's government (trans.). 
8 See Bourdieu et aI., 'L'economie de la maison', Actes de La 
Recherche en Sciences Social es, 81-2, Mar. 1990. 
9 Socially analogous to the 'inner cities' but in France 
implying peripheral housing estates (trans.). 
10 As generated and taught in the institutes of political science 
(,Sciences-Po'), in particular the one in Paris (trans.). 
II Allusion to Ferry and Renaut, La Pensee 68 (trans.). 
12 Vidal-Naquet, Les Juif s, fa memoire et Ie present. Sollers tel quel 
Sollers tel quel, Sollers as such, at last ... 1 There is a curious 
Spinozan pleasure of truth revealing itself, necessity being 
accomplished, in the confession of a title: 'Balladur tel quel', the 
concentrate, with high symbolic density, almost too sublime to 
be true, of a whole trajectory: from Tel Quel to Balladur,2 from 
the fake avant-garde ofliterature (and politics) to the authentic 
political rearguard. 
Nothing very remarkable about that, some will say -those 
who know, and have long known, that what Philippe Sollers 
has thrown at the feet of the presidential candidate, in a 
gesture unprecedented since the time of Napoleon III, is not 
literature, still less the avant-garde, but the imitation of 
literature, and of the avant-garde. But the counterfeit is 
calculated to take in the audience for whom he intends it, all 
those the cynical courtier wants to flatter, the Balladurians 
and the Balladurophile enarques, 3 with enough culture from 
This text was published in Liberation, 27 Jan. 1995, following the publication 
of an article by Philippe Sollers, entitled 'Balladur tel que!', in L'Express, 12 
Jan. 1995. 12 Sollers tel quel 
Sciences-Po for dissertations in two points and embassy 
dinners; and also all the masters of pretence who have clustered 
at one time or another around Tel Quel -the pretence of being 
a writer, or a philosophe r, or a linguist, or all of those at once, 
without being any of them or knowing anything about all that; 
when one 'knows the tune' of culture but not the words, when 
one only knows how to mimic the gestures of the great writer, 
and even, for a while, make terror reign in the world of letters. 
Thus, in so far as this unscrupulous Tartuffe of the religion of 
art succeeds in his imposture, he mocks, humiliates and 
degrades the whole heritage of two centuries of struggle for 
autonomy of the literary microcosm by casting it at the feet 
of the culturally and politically4 most abject power; and with 
himself he prostitutes all the often heroic authors -Voltaire, 
Proust or Joyce -with whom he claims allegiance in his role 
as literary corresponde ntS for semi-official magazines and 
journals. 
The cult of transgression without risk which reduces libertin­
ism to its erotic dimension leads him to make cynicism one of 
the Fine Arts. Turning the postmodern principle 'anything 
goes' into a rule of life, and claiming the right to say anything 
and its opposite, simultaneously or successively, he is able to 
have his cake and eat it -to criticize the society of the spectacle 
and to play the media personality,6 to glorify Sade and revere 
Pope John Paul II, to make revolutionary pronouncements and 
intervene in defence of traditional spelling, to deify the writer 
and to murder literature (I am thinking of his novel Femmes ). 
This man who presents and sees himself as an incarnation of 
freedom has always floated at the whim ofthe forces of the field. 
Preceded and authorized by all the political slippages of the era 
of Mitterrand, who may have been to politics, and more 
precisely to socialism, what Sollers has been to literature, and Sollers tel quel 13 
more precisely to the avant-garde, he has been carried along by 
all the political and literary illusions and disillusions of the age. 
And his trajectory, which appears to him as an exception,7 is in 
fact statistically modal, that is to say banal, and as such is 
exemplary of the career of the writer without qualities of a 
period of political and literary restoration: he is the ideal-typical 
incarnation of the individual and collective history of a whole 
generation of writers of ambition, of all those who, having 
moved, in less than thirty years, from Maoist or Trotskyist 
terrorism to positions of power in banks, insurance companies, 
politics or journalism, will readily grant him their indulgence. 
His originality -for there is one -is that he has made himself 
the theorist of the virtues of recantation and betrayal, and so, 
in a prodigious self-justificatory reversal, has managed to define 
all those who refuse to recognize themselves in the new, 
liberated, 'been there, done that' style as dogmatic, archaic, 
even terrorist. His countless public interventions are so many 
exaltations of inconsistency, or, more exactly, of double incon­
sistency -calculated to reinforce the bourgeois vision of artistic 
revolt -the one which, by a double U-turn, a double half­
revolution, leads back to the point of departure, the fluttering 
sycophancies of the young provincial bourgeois, for whom 
Mauriac and Aragon wrote prefaces. 
Paris, Januar y 1995 
Notes 
1 Philippe SoUers, French author, founder and editor of the 
journal Tel quel (trans.). 
2 Edouard Balladur, conservative politician (RPR), former 14 Sollers tel quel 
prime minister, candidate in the presidential election of 1995 
against Jacques Chirac and Lionel Jospin (trans.). 
3 Graduates of the Ecole Nationale d'Administration, an elite 
school training France's top civil servants (trans.). 
4 As Prime Minister, Balladur had as his Minister of the 
Interior Charles Pasqua, the author of a particularly repres­
sive law on immigration (trans.). 
5 Philippe Sollers regularly contributes a column of literary 
criticism in Le Monde , part of a circuit of literary mutual 
admiration (trans.). 
6 Sollers is a great admirer of the works of Guy Debord (author 
of La Societe du spectacle) and a frequent participant in all 
kinds of TV programmes (trans.). 
7 Sollers is the author of a book entitled Theorie des exceptions 
(trans.). The Status of Foreigners: a 
Shibboleth 
The question of the status that France gives to foreigners is not 
a 'detail'. It is a false problem which has regrettably come to 
the forefront as a terribly ill-formulated central questiQ,ll in the 
political battle. 
The Groupe d'Examen des Programmes Electoraux sur les 
Etrangers en France (GEPEF) , convinced that it was essential 
to force the constitutional candidates! to make their views clear 
on this issue, has carried out an experiment whose findings 
deserve to be made known. With the exception of Robert Hue,2 
and of Dominique Voynet,3 who has made it one of the central 
themes of her campaign, with the abrogation of the Pasqua 
laws,4 the regularization of the status of persons not subject to 
expulsion and the concern to protect the rights of minoriti es, the 
candidates side-stepped the attempt to ask them a set of 
This text, published in Liberation, 3 May 1995, signed by Jean·Pierre Alaux 
and myself, presents the findings of the survey which the GEPEF carried out 
in March 1995, in which eight candidates for the presidential election were 
invited to 'discuss their proposals regarding the situation of foreigners in 
France', a subject practically absent from the election campaign. 16 The Status of Foreigners: a Shibboleth 
questions. Edouard Balladur sent a letter setting out generali­
ties unrelated to our twenty-six questions . Jacques Chirac did 
not respond to our request for an interview. Lionel Jospin 
mandated Martine Aubry and Jean-Christophe Cambadelis to 
answer for him, but they were as uninformed as they were 
uninformative about the positions of their favourite. 
You don't need a degree in political science to discover in their 
silences and in their discourse that they do not have much to 
set against the xenophobic discourse which, for some years now, 
has been working to generate hatred out of the misfortunes of 
society -unemployment, delinquency, drug abuse, etc. Perhaps 
for lack of convictions, perhaps for fear of losing votes by 
expressing them, they have ended up no longer talking about 
this false problem, which is always present and always absent, 
except in conventional stereotypes and more or less shame-faced 
innuendoes, with their references for example to 'law and order', 
the need to 'reduce entries to the lowest possible level' or to 
clamp down on 'clandestine immigration' (with occasional 
references, to give a progressive tinge, to 'the role of traffickers 
and employers' who exploit it). 
All these vote-catching calculations, only encouraged by the 
logic of a political and media universe fascinated by opinion 
polls, are based on a series of presuppo sitions which are without 
foundation -or with no other foundation in any case than the 
most primitive logic of magical participation, contamination by 
contact and verbal association. To take one of countless 
examples: how can one speak of 'immigrants' to refer to people 
who have not 'emigrated' from anywhere and who are moreover 
described as 'second-generation'? Similarly, one of the major 
functions of the adjective 'clandestine' which fastidious souls 
concerned for their progressive image link with the term 
'immigrants' is surely to create a verbal and mental identifica-The Status of Foreigners: a Shibboleth 17 
tion between the undetected crossing of frontiers by people and 
the necessarily fraudulent and therefore clandestine smuggling 
of objects that are forbidden (on both sides of the frontier) such 
as drugs or weapons. This is a criminal confusion which causes 
the people concerned to be thought of as criminals. 
These are beliefs which politicians end up believing to be 
universally shared by their electors. Their vote-catching dema­
gogy is based on the assumption that 'public opi nion' is hostile 
to 'immigration" to foreigners, to any kind of opening of the 
frontiers. The verdicts of the 'pollsters' -the modern-day 
astrologers -and the advice of the spin-doctors who make up 
for their lack of competence and conviction, urge them to strive 
to 'win votes from Le Pen'. But, to limit ourselves to just one 
argument, though a fairly strong one, the very score which Le 
Pen now obtains, after two years of the Pasqua laws and of 
language and measures directed towards law and order, suggests 
that the more the rights of foreigners are reduced, the bigger the 
electorate of the Front National grows (this is obviously 
something of a simplification, but no more so than the idea often 
put forward that any measure aimed at improving the legal 
status of foreigners on French territory would have the effect 
of increasing Le Pen's vote). What is certain, in any case, is that 
before imputing the electoral score of the Front National solely 
to xenophobia, one should consider some other factors, such as 
the corruption scandals that have besmirched the medio­
political world. 
When all that has been said, one still needs to rethink the 
question of the status of the foreigner in modern democracies, 
in other words of the frontiers which can legitimately be 
imposed on the movement of persons in worlds which, like our 
own, derive so much advantage from the circulation of persons 
and goods. One should at least, in the short term, if only in the 18 The Status of Foreigners : a Shibboleth 
logic of enlightened self-interest, evaluate the costs for the 
country of the law-and-o rder policy associated with the name 
of Mr Pasqua -the costs resulting from discrimination in and 
through police checks, which can only tend to create or reinforce 
'social fracture', and from the increasingly widespread violation 
of fundamental rights, costs for the prestige of France and its 
particular tradition as defender of human rights, etc. 
The question of the status accorded to foreigners is indeed the 
decisive criterion, the shibboleth S enabling one to judge the 
capacity of the candidates to take a position, in all their choices, 
against the narrow-minded, regressive, security-minded, pro­
tectionist, conservative, xenophobic France, and in favour of 
the open, progressive, internationalist, universalist France. 
That is why the choice of the elector-citizens ought to fall on 
the candidate who most clearly makes a commitment to 
perform the most radical and most total break with the present 
policy of France as regards the 'reception' offoreigners. It ought 
to be Lionel Jospin ... But will he want it? 
Paris , May 1995 
Notes 
1 les candidats republicai ns, i.e. excluding the overtly racist 
Front National (trans.). 
2 General Secretary of the French Communist Party (trans.). 
3 Leader of one of the ecology parties, currently Minister of the 
Environment in the Jospin government (tran s.). 
4 Cf. p. 14, note 4 (trans.). 
5 Shibboleth, a decisive test by which a person's capacity can 
be judged. Abuse of Power by the 
Advocates of Reason 
[ .. . ] From deep inside the Islamic countries there comes a very 
profound question with regard to the false universalism of the 
West, or what I call the imperialism of the universal.l France 
has been the supreme incarnation of this iIl!perial ism, which in 
this very country has given rise to f{ �ational populism, 
associated for me with the name of Herder. If it is true that one 
form of universalism is no more than a nationalism which 
invokes the universal (human rights, etc.) in order to impose 
itself, then it becomes less easy to write off all fundamentalist 
reaction against it as reactionary. Scientific rationalism -the 
rationalism of the mathematical models which inspire the policy 
of the IMF or the World Bank, that of the law firms, great 
juridical multinationals which impose the traditions of Ameri­
can law on the whole planet, that of rational-action theories, 
etc. -is both the expression and the justification of a Western 
arrogance, which leads people to act as if they had the monopoly 
of reason and could set themselves up as world policemen, in 
Intervention at the public discussion organized by the International Parlia­
ment of Writers at the Frankfurt Book Fair, 15 Oct. 1995. 20 Abuse of Power by the Advocates of Reason 
other words as self-appointed holders of the monopoly of 
legitimate violence, capable of applying the force of arms in the 
service of universal justice. Terrorist violence, through the 
irrationalism of the despair which is almost always at its root, 
refers back to the inert violence of the powers which invoke 
reason. Economic coercion is often dressed up in juridical 
reasons. Imperialism drapes itself in the legitimacy of interna­
tional bodies. And, through the very hypocrisy of the 
rationalizations intended to mask its double standards, it tends 
to provoke or justify, among the Arab, South American or 
African peoples, a very profound revolt against the reason 
which cannot be separated from the abuses of power which are 
armed or justified by reason (economic, scientific or any other). 
These 'irrationalisms' are partly the product of our rationalism, 
imperialist, invasive and conquering or mediocre, narrow, 
defensive, regressive and repressive, depending on the place and 
time. One is still defending reason when one fights those who 
mask their abuses of power under the appearances of reason or 
who use the weapons of reason to consolidate or justify an 
arbitrary empire. 
Frankf urt, October 1995 
Notes 
I Bourdieu, 'Deux imperialismes de l'universel'. The Train Driver"s Remark 
Questioned after the explosion in the second coach of the 
express metro train he was driving on Tuesday, 17 October, the 
driver, who according to witnesses had led the evacuation of the 
passengers with exemplary calm, warned against the tempta­
tion to take revenge on the Algerian community. They are, he 
said simply, 'people like us'. 
This extra-ordinary remark, a 'healthy truth of the people', as 
Pascal would have said, made a sudden break with the utterances 
of all the ordinary demagogues who, unconsciously or calculated ly, 
align themselves with the xenophobia or racism they attribute 
to the people, while helping to produce them; or who use the 
supposed expectations of those they sometimes call 'simple folk' 
as an excuse for offering them, as 'good enough for them', the 
simplistic thoughts they attribute to them; or who appeal to the 
sanctions of the market (and the advertisers), incarnated in 
audience ratings or opinion polls and cynically identified with the 
democratic verdict of the largest number, in order to impose their 
own vulgarity and abject servility on everyone. 
Text published in Alternatives Algeriennes, Nov. 1995. 22 The Train Driver's Remark 
This exceptional remark provided the proof that it is possible 
to resist the violence that is exerted daily, with a clear 
conscience, on television, on the radio and in the newspapers, 
through verbal reflexes, stereotyped images and conventional 
words, and the effect of habituation that it produces, impercep­
tibly raising, throughout the whole population, the threshold of 
tolerance of racist insults and contempt, reducing critical 
defences against pre-logical thought and verbal confusion 
(between Islam and Islamicis m, between Muslim and Islamicist, 
or between Islamicist and terrorist, for example), insidiously 
reinforcing all the habits of thought and behaviour inherited 
from more than a century of colonialism and colonial struggles. 
Only a detailed analysis of the film of one of the 1,850,000 
'identity checks' recently carried out by the police to the great 
satisfaction of our Minister of the Interior! would give some idea 
of the multitude of subtle humiliations (condesc ending use of tu, 
body searches in public, etc.) or flagrant injustices and illegalities 
(assault, forced entry, violation of privacy) inflicted on a 
significant proportion of the citizens or guests of this country, 
once renowned for its openness to foreigners; and also give an 
idea of the indignation, revolt or rage that such behaviour can 
arouse. Ministerial pronouncements, visibly designed to reas­
sure, or to satisfy the craving for 'law and order', would at once 
become less reassuring. 
That simple remark contained an exhortation by example to 
combat resolutely all those who, in their desire always to leap 
to the simplest answer, caricature an ambiguous historical 
reality in order to reduce it to the reassuring dichotomies of 
Manichean thought which television, always inclined to confuse 
a rational dialogue with a wrestling match, has set up as a 
model. It is infinitely easier to take up a position for or against 
an idea, a value, a person, an institution or a situation, than to The Train Driver's Remark 23 
analyse what it truly is, in all its complexity. People are all the 
quicker to take sides on what journalists call a 'problem of 
society' -the question of the Muslim veil,2 for example -the 
more incapable they are of analysing and understanding its 
meaning, which is often quite contrary to ethnocen tric intui­
tion. 
Historical realities are always enigmatic and, while appearing 
to be self-evident, are difficult to decipher; and there is perhaps 
none which presents these characteristics in a higher degree 
than Algerian reality. That is why it represents an extraordi­
nary challenge, both for knowledge and for action. This truth­
test of all analyses is also and above all a touchstone of all 
commitments. 
In this case more than ever, rigorous analysis of situations 
and institutions is undoubtedly the best antidote against partial 
views and against all forms of Manicheism -often associated 
with the pharisaic indulgences of 'communitarian' thought -
which, through the representations they engender and the 
words in which they are expressed, are often fraught with 
deadly consequences. 
Paris, Nove mber 1995 
Notes 
1 This was Charles Pasqua -cf. p. 14, note 4 (trans.). 
2 The wearing of the 'veil' at school aroused strong protests 
from a number of 'intellectuals' who saw it as a threat to the 
secular principles of French state schooling (trans.). Against the Destruction of a 
Civilization 
I have come here to express our support to those who have been 
fighting for the last three weeks against the destruction of a 
civilization, associated with the existence of public service, the 
civilization of republican equality of rights, rights to education, 
to health, culture, research, art, and, above all, work. 
I have come here to say that we understand this deep-rooted 
movement, in other words both the despair and the hopes that 
are expressed in it, and which we too feel, to say that we do not 
understand (or that we understand only too well) those who do 
not understand it, like the philosopher! who, in the Journal du 
Dimanche of 10 December, discovers with stupefaction the 'gulf 
between the rational understanding of the world', incarnated, 
according to him, by Prime Minister J uppe -he spells it out for 
us -and 'the deep wishes of the population'. 
Remarks at the Gare de Lyon, Paris, during the strikes of December 1995. 
Pierre Bourdieu spoke, in the name of the intellectuals supporting the strikers, 
alongside representatives of trade unions (in particular, SUD) and associations 
(Ae!, Droits Devant, etc.) with whom he had been associated in previous 
campaigns, at a mass meeting at the station. (Trans.) Against the Destruction of a Civilization 25 
This opposition between the long-term view of the enlight­
ened 'elite' and the short-term impulses of the populace or its 
representatives is typical of reactionary thinking at all times 
and in all countries; but it now takes a new form, with the state 
nobility, which derives its conviction of its legitimacy from 
academic qualifications and from the authority of science, 
especially economics. For these new governors by divine right, 
not only reason and modernity but also the movement of change 
are on the side of the governors -ministers, employers or 
'experts'; unreason and archaism, inertia and conservatism are 
on the side of the people, the trade unions and critical 
intellectuals . 
This technocratic certainty is what Juppe expresses when he 
declares: 'I want France to be a serious country and a happy 
country.' This can be translated as: 'I want serious people, in 
other words the elites, the enarques, those who know where the 
people's happiness lies, to be able to make the people happy, 
even despite the people, against their will. For the common 
people, blinded by their desires, as the philosopher said, do not 
understand their own happiness -and in particular their good 
fortune in being governed by men who, like Mr Juppe, 
understand their happiness better than they do.' That is how 
the technocrats think and that is their notion of democracy. 
And, not surprisingly, they do not understand it when the 
people, in whose name they claim to govern, have the supreme 
ingratitude to go out into the streets and demonstrate against 
them. 
That state nobility, which preaches the withering away of the 
state and the undivided reign of the market and the consumer, 
the commercial substitute for the citizen, has kidnapped the 
state: it has made the public good a private good, has made the 
'public thing', res public a, the Republic, its own thing. What is 26 Against the Destruction of a Civilization 
at stake now is winning back democracy from technocracy. We 
must put an end to the reign of' experts' in the style of the World 
Bank or the IMF, who impose without discussion the verdicts 
of the new Leviathan, the 'financial markets', and who do not 
seek to negotiate but to 'explain'; we must break with the new 
faith in the historical inevitability professed by the theorists of 
liberalism; we must invent new forms of collective political work 
capable of taking note of necessities, especially economic ones 
(that can be the task of the experts), but in order to fight them 
and, where possible, to neutralize them. 
The present crisis is a historical opportunity, for France and 
no doubt also for all those, ever more numerous, in Europe and 
throughout the world, who reject this new choice: 'liberalism or 
barbarism'. The railway workers, postal workers, teachers, civil 
servants, students and so many others, actively or passively 
engaged in the movement, have, through their demonstrations 
and declarations, through the countless rethinkings that they 
have provoked , which the media cannot put the lid on, raised 
quite fundamental problems, too important to be left to 
technocrats as self-satis fied as they are unsatisfactory. How do 
we restore for each of us an enlightened, reasonable definition 
of the future of the public services, of health, education, 
transport and so on, in coordination with those who, in the other 
countries of Europe, are exposed to the same threats? How do 
we reinvent the republican school system, rejecting the progres­
sive introduction of a two-track system, symbolized, in higher 
education, by the split between the faculties and the Grandes 
Ecoles? The same question can be asked about health or 
transport. How do we struggle against the growing insecurity 
of employm ent, threatening all those who work in the public 
services and leading to aU kinds of dependence and submission 
which are particularly pernicious in cultural activities such as Against the Destruction of a Civilization 27 
radio, television or journalism, because of the censorship they 
entail, or even in education? 
In the work of reinventing the public services, intellectuals, 
writers, artists, scientists and others have a decisive role to play. 
They can first help to break the monopoly of technocratic 
orthodoxy over the means of diffusion. But they can also 
commit themselves, in an organized and permanent way, and 
not only in the occasional encounters in a context of crisis, 
alongside those who are in a position to exert a real influence 
on the future of society -the associations and unions, in 
particular -and help to draw up rigorous analyses and inventive 
proposals about the major questions which the orthodoxy of the 
media and politics makes it impossible to raise. I am thinking 
in particular of the question of the unification of the world 
economy and the economic and social effects of the new 
international division oflabour, or the question of the supposed 
iron laws of the financial markets in whose name so many 
political initiatives are sacrificed, the question of the function 
of education and culture in economies where informati�n has 
become one of the most decisive productive forces, and so on. 
This programme may seem purely abstract and theoretical. 
But it is possible to challenge autocratic technocracy without 
falling into a populism which has too often been a trap for social 
movements, and which, once again, serves the interest of the 
technocrats. 
What I wanted to express, in any case, perhaps clumsily -and 
I apologize to those I may have shocked or bored -is a real 
solidarity with those who are now fighting to change society. I 
think that the only effective way of fighting against national 
and international technocracy is by confronting it on its own 
preferred terrain, in particular that of economics, and putting 
forward, in place of the abstract and limited knowledge which 28 Against the Destruction of a Civilization 
it regards as enough, a knowledge more respectful of human 
beings and of the realities which confront them. 
Paris , December 1995 
Notes 
1 This was Paul Ricreur (trans.). The Myth of 'Glohalization� 
and the European Welfare 
State 
Everywhere we hear it said, all day long -and this is what gives 
the dominant discourse its strength -that there is nothing to 
put forward in opposition to the neo-liberal view, that it has 
succeeded in presenting itself as self-evident, that there is no 
alternative. If it is taken for granted in this way, this is as a 
result of a whole labour of symbolic inculcation in which 
journalists and ordinary citizens participate passively and, 
above all, a certain number of intellectuals participate actively. 
Against this permanent, insidious imposition, which produces, 
through impregnation, a real belief, it seems to me that 
researchers have a role to play. First they can analyse the 
production and circulation of this discourse. There have been a 
growing number of studies, in Britain, the US and France, 
which describe very precisely the procedures whereby this 
worldview is produced, disseminated and inculcated. Through 
a whole series of analyses of texts, the journals in which they 
were published and which have little by little imposed them­
selves as legitimate, the characteristics of their authors, the 
Address to the Greek trade union confederation (GSEE), in Athens, Oct. 1996. 30 The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
seminars in which they meet to produce them, etc., they have 
shown how, in Britain and France, constant work was done, 
involving intellectuals, journalists and businessmen, to impose 
as self-evident a neo-liberal view which, essentially, dresses up 
the most classic presuppositions of conservative thought of all 
times and all countries in economic rationalizations. I am 
thinking of a study of the role of the journal Preuves, which was 
financed by the CIA and had some noted French intellectuals 
on its editorial board, and which, for twenty or twenty-five 
years -it takes time for something false to become self-evident 
-tirelessly, and initially against the current, produced ideas 
which gradually became taken for granted.! The same thing 
happened in Britain, and Thatcherism was not invented by Mrs 
Thatcher. The ground had been prepared over a long period by 
groups of intellectuals most of whom wrote columns in the 
leading newspapers .2 A possible first contribution by research­
ers could be to make these analyses more generally available, 
in a form accessible to all. 
The work of inculcation, which began a long time ago, 
continues now. And so we see articles appearing, as if by a 
miracle, just a few days apart, in aU the French papers, with 
variations linked to the position of each paper in the spectrum 
of newspapers, commen ting on the miraculous economic situa­
tion of the United States or Britain. This kind of symbolic drip­
feed to which the press and television news contribute very 
strongly -to a large extent unconsciously, because most of the 
people who repeat these claims do so in good faith -produces 
very profound effects. And as a result, neo-liberalism comes to 
be seen as an inevitability. 
A whole set of presuppositions is being imposed as self­
evident: it is taken for granted that maximum growth, and 
therefore productivity and competitiveness, are the ultimate The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 31 
and sole goal of human actions; or that economic forces cannot 
be resisted. Or again - a presupposition which is the basis of all 
the presuppo sitions of economics - a radical separation is made 
between the economic and the social, which is left to one side, 
abandoned to sociologists, as a kind of reject. Another impor­
tant assumption is the language which invades us: we absorb it 
as soon as we open a newspaper, as soon as we turn on the radio, 
and it is largely made up of euphemisms. Unfortunately, I don't 
have any Greek examples to hand, but I think you would find 
them easily enough. For example, in France, instead of 'the 
employers [Ie patronat], they say 'the vital forces of the nation 
[les forces vives de la nation] ,; a company that fires its workers 
is 'slimming', with a sporting metaphor (an energetic body has 
to he thin). To announce that a company is sacking 2,000 
people, the commentator will refer to 'Alcatel's bold social plan'. 
Then there is a whole game with the connotations and 
associations of words like flexibility, souplesse, deregulation, 
which tends to imply that the neo-liberal message is a universalist 
message of liberation. 
Against this doxa, one has to try to defend oneself, I believe, 
by analysing it and trying to understand the mechanisms 
through which it is produced and imposed. But that is not 
enough, although it is important, and there are a certain 
number of empirical observations that can be brought forward 
to counter it. In the case of France, the state has started to 
abandon a number of areas of social policy. The consequence 
is an enormous amount of suffering of all kinds, not only 
affecting people afflicted by deep poverty. It can been shown, 
for example, that the problems seen in the suburban estates 
of the cities stem from a neo-liheral housing policy, imple­
mented in the 1970s (known as 'aid to the person'). It led to 
a social segregation, with on the one hand the subproletariat, 32 The' 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
made up to a large extent of immigrants, remaining on the 
large estates, and on the other hand the secure workers with 
a regular wage and the petite bourgeoisie, leaving to live in 
small detached houses which they bought with crippling loans. 
This social separation was brought about by a political 
measure.3 
In the United States, the state is splitting into two, with on 
the one hand a state which provides social guarantees, but only 
for the privileged, who are sufficiently well-off to provide 
themselves with insurance, with guarantees, and a repressive, 
policing state, for the populace. In California, one of the richest 
states of the US -once presented by some French sociologists4. 
as the paradise of all liberations -and also one of the most 
conservative, and which has perhaps the most prestigious 
university in the world, since 1994 the prison budget has been 
greater than the budget of all the universities together. The 
blacks in the Chicago ghetto only know the state through the 
police officer, the judge, the prison warder and the parole 
officer . We see there a kind of realization of the dream of the 
dominant class, a state which, as LOlc Wacquant has shown,S 
is increasingly reduced to its policing function. 
What we see happening in America and beginning to emerge 
in Europe is a process of involution. When one studies the rise 
of the state in the societies in which it developed earliest, such 
as France and England, one first sees a concentration of physical 
force and a concentration of economic force -the two go 
together, you need money to make war, to police the country 
and so on, and you need a police force to collect money. Next 
comes a concentration of cultural capital, and then a concentra­
tion of authority. As it develops, this state acquires autonomy, 
becomes partially independent of the dominant social and 
economic forces. The state bureaucracy starts to be able to The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 33 
inflect the will of the dominant groups, to interpret them and 
sometimes to inspire policies. 
The process of regression of the state shows that resistance to 
neo-liberal doctrine and policy is that much greater in countries 
where the state traditions have been strongest. And that is 
explained by the fact that the state exists in two forms: in 
objective reality, in the form of a set of institutions such as rules, 
agencies, offices, etc., and also in people's minds. For example, 
within the French bureaucracy, when housing finance was being 
reformed, the welfare ministries fought against the financial 
ministries to defend the social housing policy. Those civil 
servants had an interest in defending their ministries and their 
positions; but they also believed in what they were doing, they 
were defending their convictions. The state, in every country, 
is to some extent the trace in reality of social conquests. For 
example, the Ministry of Labour is a social conquest that has 
been made a reality, even if, in some circumstances, it can also 
be an instrument of repression. And the state also exists in the 
minds of the workers in the form of subjective law ('it's my 
right', 'they can't do that to me'), attachment to 'established 
rights' [les acquis sociaux] , etc. For example, one of the great 
differences between France and Britain is that the Thatcherized 
British discover that they did not resist as much as they might 
have, to a large extent because the labour contract is a common 
law contract and not, as in France, an agreement guaranteed by 
the state. And now, paradoxically, at the very time when the 
British model is being held up as an example, British workers 
look to the Continent and find it offers things that their own 
labour tradition did not, namely the idea of employment law. 
The state is an ambiguous reality. It is not adequate to say 
that it is an instrument in the hands of the ruling class. The state 
is certainly not completely neutral, completely independent of 34 The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
the dominant forces in society, but the older it is and the greater 
the social advances it has incorporated, the more autonomous 
it is. It is a battleground (for example, between the finance 
ministries and the spending ministries, dealing with social 
problems ). To resist the involution oJthe state, in other words the 
regression to a penal state concerned with repression and 
progressively abandoning its social functions of education, 
health, welfare, and so on, the social movement can find support 
from those responsible for social policies, who are in charge of 
organizing aid to the long-term unemployed, and worried about 
the breakdown of social cohesion, unemployment, etc ., and 
opposed to the finance people who only want to hear about the 
constraints of 'globalization' and the place of France in the 
world. 
I've used the word 'globalization'. It is a myth in the strong 
sense of the word, a powerful discourse, an idee Jorce, an idea 
which has social force, which obtains belief. It is the main 
weapon in the battles against the gains of the welfare state. 
European workers, we are told, must compete with the least 
favoured workers of the rest of the world. The workers of Europe 
are thus offered as a model countries which have no minimum 
wage, where factory workers work twelve hours a day for a wage 
which is between a quarter and a fifth of European wages, where 
there are no trade unions, where there is child labour, and so on. 
And it is in the name of this model that flexible working, 
another magic word of neo-liberalism, is imposed, meaning 
night work, weekend work, irregular working hours, things 
which have always been part of the employers' dreams. In a 
general way, neo-liberalism is a very smart and very modern 
repackaging of the oldest ideas of the oldest capitalists. 
(Magazines in the US draw up a league table of these macho 
bosses, ranked, along with their salary, according to the number The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 35 
of people they have had the courage to sack.) It is character istic 
of conservative revolutions, that in Germany in the 1930s, those 
of Thatcher, Reagan and others, that they present restorations 
as revolutions. The present conservative revolution takes an 
unprecedented form: in contrast to earlier ones, it does not 
invoke an idealized past, through exaltation of soil and blood, 
the archaic themes of the old agrarian mytholog ies. This new 
kind of conservative revolution appeals to progress, reason and 
science (economics in this case) to justify the restoration and so 
tries to write off progressive thought and action as archaic. It 
sets up as the norm of all practices, and therefore as ideal rules, 
the real regularities of the economic world abandoned to its own 
logic, the so-called law of the market. It ratifies and glorifies the 
reign of what are called the financial markets, in other words 
the return to a kind of radical capitalism, with no other law than 
that of maximum profit, an unfettered capitalism without any 
disguise, but rationalized, pushed to the limit of its economic 
efficacy by the introduction of modern forms of domination, 
such as 'business administration', and techniques of manipula­
tion, such as market research and advertising. 
If this conservative revolution can deceive people, this is 
because it seems to retain nothing of the old Black Forest 
pastoral of the conservative revolutionaries of the 1930s; it is 
dressed up in all the signs of modernity. After all, it comes from 
Chicago. Galileo said that the natural world is written in the 
language of mathematics. The neo-liberal ideologues want us to 
believe that the economic and social world is structured by 
equations. It is by arming itself with mathematics (and power 
over the media) that neo-liberalism has become the supreme 
form ofthe conservative sociodicy which started to appear some 
thirty years ago as 'the end of ideology', or more recently, as 'the 
end of history'. 36 The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
To fight against the myth of globalization, which has the 
function of justifying a restoration, a return to an unrestrained 
-but rationalized -and cynical capitalism, one has to return 
to the facts. If we look at the statistics, we see that the 
competition experienced by European workers is largely intra­
European. According to my sources, 70 per cent of the trade of 
European countries is with other European countries. The 
emphasis placed on the extra-European threat conceals the fact 
that the main danger comes from the internal competition of 
other European countries and is sometimes called 'social 
dumping': European countries with less social welfare and lower 
wages can derive a competitive advantage from this, but in so 
doing they pull down the others, which are forced to abandon 
their welfare systems in order to resist. This implies that, in 
order to break out of this spiral, the workers of the advanced 
countries have an interest in combining with the workers in less 
developed countries to protect their social gains and to favour 
their generaliz ation to all European workers. (This is not easy, 
because of the differences in national traditions , especially in 
the weight of the unions with respect to the state and in the 
means of financing welfare.) 
But this is not all. There are also all the effects, visible to 
everyone, of neo-liberal policies. For example, several British 
studies have shown that Thatche rite policies have resulted in 
enormous insecurity, a sense of distress, not only among manual 
workers but also in the middle classes. The same can be seen in 
the United States, where there is a great rise in the number of 
insecure, underpaid jobs (which artificially bring down official 
unemployment rates). The American middle classes, exposed to 
the threat of suddenly losing their jobs, are feeling a terrible 
insecurity (which shows that what is important in a job is not 
only the activity and income it provides, but also the sense of The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 37 
security it gives). In all countries, the proportion of workers 
with temporary status is growing relative to those with 
permanent jobs. Increased insecurity and 'flexibility' lead to the 
loss of the modest advantages (often described as the 'perks' of 
the 'privileged') which might compensate for low wages, such 
as long-lasting employment, health insurance and pension 
rights. Privatization equally leads to the loss of collective gains. 
For example, in the case of France, three-quarters of newly 
recruited workers are taken on on a temporary basis, and only 
a quarter of those three-quarters will become permanent 
employees. These new recruits naturally tend to be young 
people. That is why this insecurity mainly afflicts young people, 
in France -we observed this in our book La Misere du monde 
-and also in Britain, where the distress of young people has 
reached very high levels, with consequences such as delinquency 
and other very costly phenomena. 
Added to this, at the present time, is the destruction of the 
economic and social bases of the most precious cultural gains of 
humanity. The autonomy of the worlds of cultural production 
with respect to the market, which had grown steadily through 
the battles and sacrifices of writers, artists and scientists, is 
increasingly threatened. The reign of 'commerce' and the 
'commercial' bears down more strongly every day on literature, 
particularly through the concentration of publishing, which is 
more and more subject to the constraints of immediate profit; 
on literary and artistic criticism, which has been handed over 
to the most opportunistic servants of the publishers -or of their 
accomplices, with favour traded for favour; and especially on 
the cinema (one wonders what will be left in ten years' time of 
European experimental cinema if nothing is done to provide 
avant-garde directors with the means of production and 
perhaps more importantly distribution) . Not to mention the 38 The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
social sciences, which are condemned either to subordinate 
themselves to the directly self-interested sponsorship of corpo­
rate or state bureaucracies or wither under the censorship of 
power (relayed by the opportunists) or money. 
While globalization is above all a justificatory myth, there is 
one case where it is quite real, that of the financial markets. 
Thanks to the removal of a number of legal restrictions and the 
development of electronic communications which lead to lower 
communication costs, we are moving towards a unified financial 
market -which does not mean a homogeneous market. It is 
dominated by certain economies, in other words the richest 
countries, and more especially by the country whose currency 
is used as an international reserve currency and which therefore 
enjoys a greater scope within these financial markets. The 
money market is a field in which the dominant players -in this 
case the United States -occupy a position such that they can 
largely define the rules of the game. This unification of the 
financial markets around a small number of countries holding 
the dominant position reduces the autonomy of the national 
financial markets. The French financiers, the Inspectors of 
Finances, who tell us that we must bow to necessity, forget to 
tell us that they make themselves the accomplices of that 
necessity and that, through them, it is the French national state 
which is abdicating. 
In short, globalization is not homogenization; on the con­
trary, it is the extension of the hold of a small number of 
dominant nations over the whole set of national financial 
markets. There follows from this a partial redefinition of the 
international division oflabour, with European workers suffer­
ing the consequences, seeing for example the transfer of capital 
and industries towards low-wage countries. This international 
capital market tends to reduce the autonomy of the national The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 39 
capital markets, and in particular to prevent nation-states from 
manipulating exchange rates and interest rates, which are 
increasingly determined by a power concentrated in the hands 
of a small number of countries. National authorities are subject 
to the risk of speculative assaults by agents wielding massive 
funds, who can provoke a devaluation, with left-wing govern­
ments naturally being particula rly threatened because they 
arouse the suspicion of the financial markets (a right-wing 
government which acts out of line with the ideals of the IMF 
is in less danger than a left-wing government even if the latter's 
policy matches the ideals of the IMF). It is the structure of the 
worldwide field which exerts a structural constraint, and this is 
what gives the mechanisms an air of inevitability. The policy 
of a particular state is largely determined by its position in the 
structure of the distribution of finance capital (which defines 
the structure of the world economic field). 
Faced with these mechanisms, what can one do? The first 
thing is to reflect on the implicit limits which economic theory 
accepts. Economic theory, when it assesses the costs of a policy, 
does not take account of what are called social costs. For 
example, a housing policy, the one chosen by Giscard d'Estaing 
when he was Finance Minister in 1970, implied long-term social 
costs which do not appear as such: twenty years later, who, 
apart from sociologists, remembers that measure? Who would 
link a riot in a suburb of Lyon to a political decision of 1970? 
Crimes go unpunished because people forget. All the critical 
forces in society need to insist on the inclusion of the social costs 
of economic decisions in economic calculations. What will this 
or that policy cost in the long term in lost jobs, suffering, 
sickness, suicide, alcoholism, drug addiction, domestic violence, 
etc., all things which cost a great deal, in money, but also in 
misery? I think that, even ifit may appear very cynical, we need 40 The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
to turn its own weapons against the dominant economy, and 
point out that, in the logic of enlightened self-interest, a strictly 
economic policy is not necessarily economical -in terms of the 
insecurity of persons and property, the consequent policing 
costs, etc. More precisely, there is a need to radically question 
the economic view which individualizes everything -produc­
tion as much as justice or health, costs as well as profits -and 
which forgets that efficiency, which it defines in narrow, 
abstract terms, tacitly identifying it with financial profitability, 
clearly depends on the outcomes by which it is measured, 
financial profitability for shareholders and investors, as at 
present, or satisfaction of customers and users, and, more 
generally, satisfaction and well-being of producers, consumers, 
and, ultimately, the largest possible number. Against this 
narrow, short-term economics, we need to put forward an 
economics of happiness, which would take note of all the profits, 
individual and collective, material and symbolic, associated 
with activity (such as security), and also all the material and 
symbolic costs associated with inactivity or precarious employ­
ment (for example, consumption of medicine s: France holds the 
world record for use of tranquilliz ers). You cannot cheat with 
the law of the conservation of violence: all violence is paid for, and, 
for example, the structural violence exerted by the financial 
markets, in the form oflayoffs, loss of security, etc., is matched 
sooner or later in the form of suicides, crime and delinquency, 
drug addiction, alcoholism, a whole host of minor and major 
everyday acts of violence. 
At the present time, the critical efforts of intellectuals, trade 
unions or associations should be applied as a matter of priority 
against the withering away of the state. The national states are 
undermined from outside by these financial forces, and they are 
undermined from inside by those who act as the accompl ices of The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 41 
these financial forces, in other words, the financiers, bankers 
and finance ministry officials. I think that the dominated 
groups in society have an interest in defending the state, 
particularly in its social aspect. This defence of the state is not 
inspired by nationalism. While one can fight against the 
national state, one has to defend the 'universal' functions it 
fulfils, which canbe fulfilled as well, or better, by a supranational 
state. If we do not want it to be the Bundesb ank, which, 
through interest rates, governs the financial policies of the 
various states, should we not fight for the creation of a 
supranational state, relatively autonomous with respect to 
international political forces and national political forces and 
capable of developing the social dimension of the European 
institutions? For example, measures aimed at reducing the 
working week would take on their full meaning only if they were 
taken by a European body and were applicable to all the 
European nations. 
Historically, the state has been a force for rationalization, but 
one which has been put at the service of the dominant forces. 
To prevent this being the case, it is not sufficient to denounce 
the technocrats of Brussels. We need to develop a new 
internationalism, at least at the regional level of Europe, which 
could offer an alternative to the regression into nationalism 
which, as a result of the crisis, threatens all the European 
countries to some degree. This would imply constructing 
institutions that are capable of standing up to these forces of the 
financial market, and introducing -the Germans have a 
wonderful word for this -a Regr essionsverbot, a ban on backward 
movement with respect to social gains at the European level. To 
achieve this, it is absolutely essential that the trade unions 
operate at this European level, because that is where the forces 
they are fighting against are in action. It is therefore necessary 42 The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
to try to create the organizational bases for a genuine critical 
internationalism capable of really combating neo-liberalism. 
Final point: why are the intellectuals so ambiguous in all this? 
I will not try to enumerate -it would be too long and too cruel 
-all the forms of surrender or, worse, collaboration. I will 
simply allude to the debates of the so-called modern or 
postmodern philosophers, who, when they are not simply 
content to let things take their course, occupied as they are in 
their scholastic games, wrap themselves up in a verbal defence 
of reason and rational dialogue, or, worse, offer a supposedly 
postmode rn but in fact 'radical chic' version of the ideology of 
the end of ideology, with the condemnation of the great 
explanatory narratives or the nihilist denunciation of science. 
In fact the strength of the neo-liberal ideology is that it is 
based on a kind of social neo-Darwinism: it is 'the brightest and 
the best', as they say at Harvard, who come out on top (Becker, 
winner of the Nobel prize for economics, developed the idea that 
Darwinism is the basis of the aptitude for rational calculation 
which he ascribes to economic agents). Behind the globalist 
vision of the International of the dominant groups, there is a 
philosophy of competence according to which it is the most 
competent who govern and who have jobs, which implies that 
those who do not have jobs are not competent. There are the 
'winners' and the 'losers', there is the aristocracy, those I call 
the state nobility, in other words those people who have all the 
properties of a nobility in the medieval sense of the word and 
who owe their authority to education, or, as they see it, to 
intelligence, seen as a gift from Heaven, whereas we know that 
in reality it is distributed by society and that inequalities in 
intelligence are social inequalities. The ideology of competence 
serves very wen to justify an opposition which is rather like that 
between masters and slaves. On the one hand there are full The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 43 
citizens who have very rare and overpaid capacities and 
activities, who are able to choose their employer (whereas the 
others are at best chosen by their employer), who are able to 
obtain very high incomes on the international labour market, 
who are, both men and women, overworked (I recently read an 
excellent British study of these supercha rged executive couples 
who perpetually jet around the world and earn more than they 
could dream of spending in four lifetimes ... ), and then, on the 
other side, there is a great mass of people condemned to 
borderlines jobs or unemployment . 
Max Weber said that dominant groups always need a 
'theodicy of their own privilege', or more precisely, a sociodicy, 
in other words a theoretical justification of the fact that they 
are privileged. Competence is nowadays at the heart of that 
sociodicy, which is accepted, naturally, by the dominant It IS 
in their interest -but also by the others.6 In the suffering of 
those excluded from work, in the wretchedness of the long-term 
unemployed, there is something more than there was in the 
past. The Anglo-American ideology, always somewhat sancti­
monious, distinguished the 'undeserving poor', who had brought 
it upon themselves, from the 'deserving poor', who were judged 
worthy of charity. Alongside or in place of this ethical 
justification there is now an intellectual justification. The poor 
are not just immoral, alcoholic and degenerate, they are stupid, 
they lack intelligence. A large part of social suffering stems from 
the poverty of people's relationship to the educational system, 
which not only shapes social destinies but also the image they 
have of their destiny (which undoubtedly helps to explain what 
is called the passivity of the dominated, the difficulty in 
mobilizing them etc.). Plato had a view of the social world which 
resembles that of our technocrats, with the philosophers, the 
guardians, and then the people. This philosophy is inscribed, in 44 The 'Globalization' Myth and the Welfare State 
implicit form, in the educational system. It is very powerful, 
and very deeply internalized. Why have we moved from the 
committed intellectual to the 'uncommitted' intellectual? Partly 
because intellectuals are holders of cultural capital and, even if 
they are the dominated among the dominant, they still belong 
among the dominant. That is one of the foundations of their 
ambivalence, of their lack of commitment in struggles. They 
obscurely share this ideology of competence. When they revolt, 
it is still because, as in Germany in 1933, they think they are 
not receiving their due in relation to their competence, guaran­
teed by their qualifications. 
Athens, October 1966 
Notes 
1 Gremion, Preuves, une revue europeenne Ii Paris, and Intelli­
gence de l'ant i-communisme. 
2 Dixon, 'Les Evangelistes du Marche'; Pasche and Peters, 
'Les premiers pas de la Societe du Mont-PeIerin ou les dessous 
chics du neoliberali sme'. 
3 Cf. Bourdieu et al., 'L' economie de la maison', A ctes de la 
Recherche en Sciences Sociales, 81 -2, Mar. 1990. 
4 In particular, Edgar Morin and Jean Baudrillard (trans.). 
5 Wacquant, 'De l'Etat charitable it l'Etat penal'. 
6 Cf. Bourdieu, 'The racism of intelligence'. The Thoughts of Chairman 
Tietmey er 
I don't want to be here to put the cultural icing on the cake. 
The breaking of the bonds of social integration which culture 
is asked to reconstruct is the direct consequence of a policy, an 
economic policy. And sociologists are often asked to repair 
economists' breakages. So, instead of merely offering what, in 
hospitals, is called palliative treatment, I would like to raise the 
question of the doctors' contribution to the disease. For it might 
be that to a large extent the social 'diseases' that we deplore are 
produced by the often brutal medicine given to those who are 
supposed to be being cured. 
To do so, having read in the aeroplane which took me from 
Athens to Zurich for an interview with the President of the 
Bundesb ank, who is presented as 'the high priest of the 
deutschmark', neither more nor less, and since I am in a centre 
renowned for its traditions of literary exegesis, I would like to 
perform a kind of hermeneutic analysis of a text which you will 
find in full in Le Monde of 17 October 1996. 
Address given at the Rencontres Culturelles Franco·Allemandes on 'Social 
integration as a cultural problem', University of Freiburg, Oct. 1996. 46 The Thoughts of Chairman Tietmeyer 
This is what the 'high priest of the deutschmark' says: 'The 
crucial issue today is to create the conditions favourable to 
lasting growth, and the confidence of investors. It is therefore 
necessary to restrain public spending.' In other words -he is 
more explicit in the following sentences -to bury as quickly as 
possible the welfare state and its expensive social and cultural 
policies, so as to reassure investors, who would prefer to take 
charge of their own cultural investment s. I am sure that they 
all enjoy Romantic music and expressionist paintings and, while 
I know nothing of the tastes ofthe President of the Bundesbank, 
I can well believe that, like the Governor of the Banque de 
France, Mr Trichet, he reads poetry and sponsors the arts. He 
goes on: 'It is therefore necessary to restrain public spending 
and reduce taxation to a level that is acceptable in the long 
term.' By which he means: reduce the taxation of investors to 
a level that is acceptable in the long term to these same 
investors, lest they be discouraged and driven to take their 
investments elsewhere. Next: 'reform the social welfare system'. 
In other words, bu ry the welfare state and its policies of social 
protection, which undermine the confidence of investors and 
provoke their legitimate distrust, because they are convinced 
that their economic entitlements -we speak of social entitle­
ments, we could equally speak of economic entitlements - I 
mean their capital, are not compatible with the social entitle­
ments of the workers, and that these economic entitlements 
must obviously be safeguarded at all costs, even if this means 
destroying the meagre economic and social benefits of the great 
majority of the citizens of the Europe to come, those who were 
frequently described in December 1995 as 'feather-bedded' and 
'privileged' . 
Mr Tietmeyer is convinced that the social entitlements of the 
investors, I mean their economic entitlements, would not The Thoughts of Chairman Tietmeyer 47 
survive the perpetuation of a social welfare system. And so this 
system has to be reformed, and quickl y, because the economic 
entitlements of the investors cannot wait any longer. And to 
prove to you that I am not exaggerating, I read further from 
the words of Tietmeyer, a high-flying thinker who takes his 
place in the great lineage of German idealist philosophy: 'It is 
therefore necessary to restrain public spending and reduce 
taxation to a level that is acceptable in the long term, to reform 
the social welfare system, dismantle the rigidities in the labour 
market, since a new phase of growth will only be attained if we 
make an effort' -the 'we make' is magnificent -'towards 
flexibility in the labour market'. There you are: the big words 
are out of the bag, and Mr Tietmeyer, in the great tradition of 
German idealism, gives us a splendid example of the euphemis­
tic rhetoric which prevails in the money markets today. 
Euphemism is essential in order to maintain the long- term 
confidence of investors -which, it will have become clear, is the 
alpha and omega of the whole economic system, the foundation 
and ultimate goal, the telos, of the Europe of the future -
without provoking distrust or despair among the workers, who 
in spite of everything also have to be taken into account if one 
wants to have the new phase of growth the prospect of which 
is dangled before them, in order to obtain the required effort 
from them. For it is indeed from them that this effort is 
expected, even if Mr Tietmeyer, who, it can be seen, is a past 
master of the art of euphemism, does indeed say: 'dismantle the 
rigidities in the labour market, since a new phase of growth will 
only be attained if we make an effort towards flexibility in the 
labour market.' This is splendid rhetorical work and may be 
translated thus: 'Heave ho, workers! All together now, let's 
make the effort of flexibility that you must provide!' 
Instead of calmly proceeding to ask a question about the 48 The Thoughts of Chairman Tietmeyer 
external parity of the euro, its relations with the dollar and the 
yen, the Le Monde journalist, who is equally concerned not to 
discourage the investors, who read his paper and place large 
advertisements in it, might have asked Mr Tietmeyer what he 
understood by the key words in the language of the investors : 
'rigidity in the labour market' and 'flexibility in the labour 
market'. The workers, if they were to read a paper as 
indisputably serious as Le Monde, would immediately under­
stand what needs to be understood: night work, weekend work, 
irregular shifts, increased pressure, stress, etc. It can be seen 
that 'in the labour market' functions as a kind of Homeric 
epithet that can be attached to a certain number of words, and 
one might be tempted, in order to measure the flexibility of Mr 
Tietmeyer's language, to talk for example about flexibility or 
rigidity in the financial markets. The strangeness of this usage 
in Mr Tietmeyer's rigid discourse entitles us to suppose that 
there would be no question, in his mind, of 'dismantling 
rigidities in the financial markets', or 'making an effort towards 
flexibility on the financial markets '. This leads us to think that, 
contrary to what is suggested by the 'we' in Mr Tietmeyer's 'if 
we make an effort', the workers alone are expected to make this. 
effort and that they are the target of the threat, close to 
blackmail, contained in the sentence: 'since a new phase of 
growth will only be attained if we make an effort towards 
flexibility in the labour market'. To spell it out: Abandon your 
benefits today, so as not to destroy the confidence of the 
investors, for the sake of the growth that that will bring us 
tomorrow. This logic is well known to the workers concerned, 
who, to sum up the policy of 'participation' offered to them by 
Gaullism in times gone by, would say 'You give me your watch 
and I'll give you the time of day.' 
After that commentary, I reread one last time the words of The Thoughts of Chairman Tietmeyer 49 
Mr Tietmeyer: 'The crucial issue today is to create the 
conditions favourable to lasting growth, and the confidence of 
investors. It is therefore necessary .. .' -note the 'therefore' -
'to restrain public spending, reduce taxation to a level that is 
acceptable in the long term, to reform the welfare system, 
dismantle the rigidities in the labour market, since a new phase 
of growth will only be attained if we make an effort towards 
flexibility in the labour market.' If such an extraordinary text, 
so extraord inarily extraordinary, had every chance of passing 
unnoticed, living the brieflife of the ephemeral writings in daily 
papers, this is because it was perfectly adjusted to the 'horizon 
of expectation' of the great majority of the readers of daily 
papers that we are. And that invites the question as to who 
produced and disseminated such a widespread 'horizon of 
expectation' (since the very least that needs to be added to 
reception theories, in which 1 am not a great believer, is the 
question of where that 'horizon' comes from). That horizon is 
the product of social, or rather political, work. IfMr Tietmeyer's 
words pass so readily, that is because they are common 
currency. They are everywhere, in every mouth, they circulate 
like legal tender, people accept them without hesitation, just as 
they would with currency, a stable, strong currency of course, 
as stable and worthy of confidence, belief, credit, as the 
deutschmark: 'lasting growth', 'investor confidence', 'public 
spending', 'welfare system', 'rigidity', 'labour market', 'flexibil­
ity', to which one should add 'globalization' (I learned from 
another newspaper 1 read in the aeroplane, showing how 
widespread the notion has become, that French chefs identify 
'globalization' as a threat to the national cuisine ... ), 'deregu­
lation', 'rate cuts' -without even saying which rates -
'competitiveness', 'productivity', etc. 
This economic -sounding discourse would not be able to 50 The Thoughts of Chairman Tietmeyer 
circulate beyond the circle of its promoters without the 
collaboration of a host of people -politicians, journalists, and 
ordinary citizens with a tincture of economic culture sufficient 
to participate in the generalized circulation of the debased 
words of an economic vulgate. The questions of the journalist 
are one indication of the effect produced by media churning. He 
is so attuned to Mr Tietmeyer's expectations, so impregnated 
in advance with the answers, that he could have produced them 
himself. It is through such passive complicity that a view of the 
world that is called neo-liberal, but is in fact conservative, has 
progressively taken root, based on an atavistic faith in historical 
inevitability driven by the primacy of the productive forces 
unregulated except by the competing wills of the individual 
producers. And it is perhaps no accident that so many people 
of my generation have moved from a Marxist fatalism to a neo­
liberal fatalism: in both cases, economism forbids responsibility 
and mobilization by cancelling out politics and imposing a 
whole set of unquestioned ends -maximum growth, competi­
tiveness, productivity. To let oneself be guided by the President 
of the Bundesbank is to accept such a philosophy. What is 
surprising is that this fatalistic doctrine gives itself the air of a 
message of liberation, through a whole series of lexical tricks 
around the idea of freedom, liberation, deregulation, etc., a 
whole series of euphemisms or ambiguous uses of words -
'reform', for example -designed to present a restoration as a 
revolution, in a logic which is that of aU conservative revolu­
tions. 
To conclude, let us come back to the key phrase in Mr 
Tietmeyer's discourse, the confidence of the markets. It has the 
virtue of bringing out clearly the historic choice which all those 
in power have to confront: between the confidence of the 
markets and the confidence of the people, they must choose. But The Thoughts of Chairman Tietmeyer 51 
the policy which aims to keep the confidence of the markets is 
likely to lose the confidence of the people. According to a recent 
survey of people's attitude to politicians, two-thirds of those 
questioned say that politicians are incapable oflistening to and 
taking into account what the French population thinks. This 
complaint is particularly common among the supporters of the 
Front National -whose irresistible rise is deplored by political 
commentators who never think to make the connection between 
FN and IMF. (This despair at politicians is particularly marked 
in the age group 18 to 34, among manual and clerical workers 
and also among supporters of the Communist Party and the 
Front National. It is relatively high among the supporters of all 
parties, and rises to 64 per cent among supporters of the 
Socialist Party, a fact which is again not unconnected with the 
rise of the FN.) If the sacrosanct confidence of the markets is 
put in the context of the lack of confidence of the citizens, it 
perhaps becomes clearer where the root of the sickness is. 
Economics is, with a few exceptions, an abstract science based 
on the absolutely unjustifiable separation between the eco­
nomic and the social which defines economism. This separation 
is the source of the failure of any policy that has no other end 
than to safeguard 'economic order and stability', the new 
Absolute of which Mr Tietmeyer has made himself the high 
priest, a failure to which the political blindness of some is 
leading us and of which we are all the victims. 
Freibur g, October 1996 Social Scientists, Economic 
Science and the Social 
Movement 
The social movement of December 1995 was a movement 
unprecedented in its scale and above all in its objectives. And 
if it was seen as extremely important by a large section of the 
French population and also by many people abroad, this is 
above all because it introduced some quite new objectives into 
social struggles. In a rough and confused form it outlined a 
genuine project for a society, collectively affirmed and capable 
of being put forward against what is being imposed by the 
dominant politics, by the revolutionary conservatives who are 
now in power, both in government and in the media. 
Asking myself what social science researchers could offer to 
an undertaking like the Etats Generaux, I am convinced of the 
need for their presence in uncovering the specifically cultural 
and ideological dimension of this conservative revolution. The 
movement of last December received strong public support, 
because it was seen as a defence of the social advances, not of 
one particular category -even if one category was at the 
Remarks at the inaugural meeting of the Etats Generaux du Mouvement 
Social, Paris, 23-4· Nov. 1996. Social Scientists and the Social Movement 53 
forefront, because it was particularly under attack -but of a 
whole society, and even of a set of societies. These advances 
concern work, public education, public transport, everything 
which is public, and therefore the state, an institution which -
contrary to what some people would have us believe -is not 
necessarily archaic and regressive . 
It is no accident that this movement emerged in France; there 
are historical reasons for that. But what ought to strike 
observers is that it is continuing, being relayed, in France, in 
various, unexpected ways -the truck drivers' action: who would 
have expected it in that form? -and also in Europe: in Spain, 
right now; in Greece, a few years ago; in Germany, where the 
movement took inspiration from the French movement and has 
explicitly declared its affinities with it; in Korea -which is even 
more important, for symbolic and practical reasons. This kind 
of rotating struggle is, it seems to me, searching for its 
theoretical unity and above all its practical unity. The French 
movement can be seen as the vanguard of a worldwide struggle 
against neo-liberalism and against the new conservative revo­
lution, in which the symbolic dimension is extremely important. 
One of the weaknesses of all progressive movements lies in the 
fact that they have underestimated the importance of this 
dimension and have not always forged appropriate weapons to 
fight on this front. Social moveme nts are several symbolic 
revolutions behind their opponents, who use media consultants, 
public relations consultants and so on. 
The conservative revolution calls itself neo-liberal, thereby 
giving itself a scientific air, and the capacity to act as a theory. 
One of the theoretical and practical errors of many theories -
starting with the Marxist theory - has been the failure to take 
account of the power of theory. We must no longer make that 
mistake. Weare dealing with opponents who are armed with 54 Social Scientists and the Social Movement 
theories, and I think they need to be fought with intellectual 
and cultural weapons. In pursuing that struggle, because of the 
division of labour some are better armed than others, because 
it is their job. And some of them are ready to set to work. What 
can they offer? First of all, a certain authority. What name was 
given to the people who supported the government last 
December? Experts, although the whole lot of them together 
did not have the beginnings of the making of an economist. That 
authority effect has to be fought with an authority effect. 
But that is not all. The force of social authority, which is 
exerted on the social movement and right into the depths of the 
workers' minds, is very great. It produces a form of demorali­
zation. And one of the reasons for its strength is that it is held 
by people who all seem to agree with one another -consensus 
is in general a sign of truth. Another is that it is based on the 
apparently most powerful instruments now available to thought, 
in particular mathematics. The role of what is called the 
dominant ideology is fulfilled nowadays by a certain use of 
mathematics (I exaggerate, but it is a way of drawing attention 
to the fact that the work of rationalization -giving reasons to 
justify things that are often unjustifiable -has now found a very 
powerful instrument in mathem atical economics). This ideol­
ogy, which dresses up simply conservative thought in the guise 
of pure reason, has to be fought, with reasons, arguments, 
refutations, demonstrations; and this implies scientific work. 
One of the strengths of neo-liberal thought is that it presents 
itself as a kind of' grea t chain of Being', as in the old theological 
metaphor, where at one end there is God and then you work 
your way down, link by link, to the lowest forms of life. In the 
neo-liberal universe, right at the top, in the place of God, is a 
mathematician, and at the bottom there is an ideologue of 
Esprit, I who doesn't know much about economics but wants to Social Scientists and the Social Movement 55 
give the impression of knowing something, with the aid of a 
varnish of technical vocabulary. This very powerful chain has 
an authority effect. There are doubts, even among activists, 
which partly result from the essentially social strength of the 
theory which gives authority to the words of Mr Trichet or Mr 
Tietmeyer, the President of the Bundesbank, or this or that 
essayist. It is not a sequence of demonstrations, it is a chain of 
authorities which runs from the mathematician to the banker, 
from the banker to the philosopher -journalist, from the essayist 
to the journalist. It is also a channel for the circulation of money 
and all sorts of economic and social advantages, international 
invitations, consideration. We sociologists, without denouncing 
anyone, can undertake to map out these networks and show 
how the circulation of ideas is subtended by a circulation of 
power. There are people who exchange ideological services for 
positions of power. Examples would be needed, but it is 
sufficient to read the list of signatories of the famous 'Petition 
of experts'. What is interesting is that the hidden connections 
between people who normally work in isolation -even if we 
often see them appearing in pairs in false debates on television 
-and between foundations, associations, journals, etc., are 
then revealed to the light of day. 
Collectively, in the mode of consensus, these people utter a 
fatalistic discourse which consists of transforming economic 
tendencies into destiny. Now, social laws, economic laws and so 
on only take effect to the extent that people let them do so. And 
if conservatives favour laissez-faire, this is because in general 
these tendential laws conserve, and they need laissez-faire in 
order to conserve. Those of the financial markets, in particular, 
which are we endlessly told about, are laws of conservation, 
which need laissez-faire in order to operate. 
One would need to develop this, argue it, and above all 56 Social Scientists and the Social Movement 
nuance it. I apologize for the somewhat simplifying character 
of what I have said. As for the social movement, it can be 
satisfied with existing: it annoys enough people just like that, 
and no one is going to ask it in addition to produce justifications 
-whereas intellectuals who associate themselves with the social 
movement are immediately asked: 'But what are you propos­
ing?' We shouldn't fall into the trap of offering a programme. 
There are quite enough parties and apparatuses for that. What 
we can do is to create, not a counter-programme, but a structure 
for collective research, interdisciplinary and international, 
bringing together social scientists, activists, representatives of 
activists, etc., with the social scientists being placed in a quite 
definite role: they can participate in a particularly effective 
way, because it's their job, in working parties and seminars, in 
association with people who are in the movement. 
This rules out from the start a certain number of roles: social 
scientists are not fellow-travellers, in other words hostages and 
guarantors, figureheads and alibis who sign petitions and who 
are disposed of as soon as they have been used; nor are they 
Zhdanovian apparatchiks who come in to exercise apparently 
intellectual powers within the social movements which they 
cannot exercise in intellectual life; nor are they experts coming 
in to give lessons -not even anti-expert experts; nor are they 
prophets who will provide answers to all questions about the 
social movement and its future. They are people who can help 
to define the function of meetings like this one. Or who can point 
out that the people here are not present as spokespersons, but 
as citizens who come into a place of discussion and research, 
with ideas, with arguments, leaving their slogans, platforms and 
party habits in the cloakroom. This is not always easy. Among 
the party habits which threaten to come back are the creation 
of committees, composite motions often prepared in advance, Social Scientists and the Social Movement 57 
and so on. Sociology teaches how groups function and how to 
make use of the laws gove rning the way they function so as to 
try to circumvent them. 
There is a need to invent new forms of communication 
between researchers and activists, which means a new division 
of labour between them. One of the missions which sociologists 
can fulfil perhaps better than anyone is the fight against 
saturation by the media. We all hear ready-made phrases all day 
long. You can't turn on the radio without hearing about the 
'global village', 'globalization', and so on. These are innocent­
sounding words, but through them come a whole philosophy 
and a whole worldview which engender fatalism and submis­
sion. We can block this forced feeding by criticizing the words, 
by helping non-prof essionals to equip themselves with specific 
weapons of resistance, so as to combat the effects of authority 
and the grip of television, which plays an absolutely crucial role. 
It is no longer possible nowadays to conduct social struggles 
without having a specific programme for fighting with and 
against television. I commend to you Patrick Champagne's 
book, Faire l'opinion, which ought to be a kind of manual for 
the political campaigner. In that battle, the fight against the 
media intellectuals is important. Personally, those people do not 
cause me sleepless nights, and I never think about them when 
I write, but they have an extremely important role from a 
political standpoint, and it would be desirable for a proportion 
of the researchers to agree to devote some of their time and 
energy, in their activist mode, to countering their effects. 
A further objective has to be to invent new forms of symbolic 
action. On this point, I think that social movements, with a few 
historic exceptions, have a lot of ground to make up. In his 
book, Patrick Champag ne shows how some big mobilizations 
may receive less coverage in the newspapers and on television 58 Social Scientists and the Social Movement 
than some minuscule demonstrations that are put on in a way 
that interests the journalists. It is clearly not a question of 
fighting against the journalists, who are themselves subject to 
the constraints of job insecurity, with all the effects of 
censorship it produces in all the professions of cultural produc­
tion. But it is essential to realize that an enormous part of what 
we may say or do will be filtered, in other words often 
annihila ted, by what the journalists will say about it. Including 
what we are about to do here. And that is a remark that they 
won't reproduce in their reporting. 
To conclude, I will say that one of the problems is to be 
reflexive - a grand word, but it is not used gratuitously. Our 
objective is not only to invent responses, but to invent a way 
of inventing responses, to invent a new form of organization of 
the work of contestation and of organization of contestation, of 
the task of activism. Our dream, as social scientists, might be 
for part of our research to be useful to the social movement, 
instead of being lost, as is often the case nowadays, because it 
is intercepted and distorted by journalists or by hostile 
interpreters, etc. In the framework of groups like Raisons 
d'Agir, we would like to invent new forms of expression that 
make it possible to communicate the most advanced findings of 
research. But that also presupposes a change of language and 
outlook on the part of the researchers. 
To return to the social movement, I think, as I said a moment 
ago, that we are witnessing successive waves -I could also have 
mentioned the students' and teachers' strikes in Belgium, the 
strikes in Italy, etc. -of struggle against neo-liberal imperial­
ism, struggles which generally do not recognize each other (and 
which may take forms which are not always appealing, like 
some forms of fundamentalism). So at the very least there is a 
need to unify international information and enable it to Social Scientists and the Social Movement 59 
circulate. There is a need to reinvent internationalism, which 
was hijacked by Soviet imperialism, in other words to invent 
forms of theoretical thought and forms of practical action 
capable of operating at the level where the fight has to take 
place. If it is true that most of the dominant economic forces 
operate at world level, transnationa lly, it is also true that there 
is an empty space, that of transnational struggles. It is 
theoretically empty, because it has not been thought through, 
and it is practically empty, for lack of genuine international 
organization of the forces capable of countering the new 
conservative revolution, at least on a European scale. 
Paris, November 1996 
Notes 
I Intellectual journal associated with 'Christian personalist' 
thinking and the focus of intellectual support for the Juppe 
reforms (trans.). For a New Internationalism 
The peoples of Europe are now at a turning-point in their 
history, because the conquests of several centuries of social 
struggles, of intellectual and political battles for the dignity of 
workers, are directly threaten ed. The movements that are seen, 
first in one place, then in another, throughout Europe, and 
elsewhere, even in Korea, these movements that follow on from 
one another, in Germany, France, Greece, Italy, etc., appar­
ently without real coordination, are so many revolts against a 
policy which takes different forms in different fields and in 
different countries but which, nevertheless, is always inspired 
by the same intention, that of removing the social entitlements 
which are, whatever people say, among the highest achieve­
ments of civilization -achieveme nts that ought to be 
universalized, extended to the whole planet, globalized, instead 
of using the pretext of 'globalization', of the competition from 
economically and socially less advanced countries, in order to 
cast doubt on them. Nothing is more natural or more legitimate 
Remarks at the third international forum of the Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund 
(DGB) of Hesse, Frankfurt, 7 June 1997. For a New Internationalism 61 
than the defence of these entitlements, which some people want 
to present as a form of conservatism or archaism. Would anyone 
condemn as conservative the defence of the cultural achieve­
ments of humanity, Kant or Hegel, Mozart or Beethoven? The 
social entitlements that I am referring to, the right to work, a 
health and welfare system, for which men and women have 
suffered and fought, are achievements which are just as 
important and precious, and, moreover, they do not only 
survive in museums, libraries and academies, but are living and 
active in people's lives and govern their everyday existence. 
That is why I cannot help feeling something like a sense of 
scandal at those who make themselves the allies of the most 
brutal economic forces and who condemn the people who, in 
fighting to defend their entitlements, sometimes described as 
'privileges', defend the rights of all the men and women of 
Europe and elsewhere. 
The challenge I made a few months ago to Mr Tietmeyer has 
often been misunde rstood. It was often taken as an answer to 
a question which is wrongly posed, precisely because it is posed 
in terms of the logic of the neo-liberal thinking to which Mr 
Tietmeyer subscribes. According to that view, monetary inte­
gration, symbolized by the creation of the euro, is the obligatory 
preliminary, the necessary and sufficient condition, for the 
political integration of Europe. In other words it is assumed that 
the political integration of Europe will flow necessarily, ineluc­
tably, from economic integration. It follows that anyone who 
opposes the policy of monetary integration, and opposes its 
advocates, like Mr Tietmeyer, will be taken to oppose political 
integration, in a word, to be 'against Europe'. 
Not at all. What is in question is the role of the state (the 
currently existing national states, or the European state to be 
created), particula rly as regards the protection of social rights, 62 For a New Internationalism 
the role of the social state, which alone can stand up to the 
implacable mechanisms of the economy relinquished to itself. 
One can be against a Europe which, like that of Mr Tietmeyer, 
would serve as a relay for the financial markets, while being for 
a Europe which, through a concerted policy, blocks the way of 
the uncontrolled violence of those markets. But there is no 
reason to hope for such a policy from the bankers' Europe that 
is being prepared for us. Monetary integration cannot be 
expected to secure social integration. On the contrary: for we 
know that countries that want to maintain their competitive­
ness within the euro zone relative to their partners will have no 
option but to reduce wage costs by reducing welfare contribu­
tions. 'Social dumping' and wage-cutting, the 'flexibilization' of 
the labour market, will be the only devices left to states which 
can no longer play on exchange rates. Added to these mecha­
nisms will undoubtedly be the pressure of the 'monetary 
authorities', like the Bundesbank and its leaders, who are 
always eager to preach 'wage restraint '. Only a European social 
state would be capable of countering the disintegratory effects 
of monetary economics. But Mr Tietmeyer and the neo-liberals 
do not want either national states, which they see as simple 
obstacles to the free functioning of the economy, or, a fortiori, 
the supranational state, which they want to reduce to a bank. 
And it is clear that, if they want to get rid of the national states 
(or the Council of Ministers of Community states) by stripping 
them of their power, this is not in order to create a supranational 
state which, with enhanced authority, would impose on them 
the constrain ts, especially as regards social policy, from which 
they want at all costs to be freed. 
So it is possible to be hostile to the integration of Europe 
based solely on the single currency, without being in any way 
hostile to the political integration of Europe; and while caning, For a New Internationalism 63 
on the contrary, for the creation of a European state capable of 
controlling the European Bank and, more precisely, capable of 
controlling, by anticipating, the social effects of a union reduced 
to its purely monetary dimension, in accordance with the neo­
liberal philosophy which aims to sweep away all the vestiges of 
the (social) state as so many obstacles to the harmonious 
functioning of the markets. 
It is certain that international (and more especially intra­
European) competition is an obstacle to the application in one 
coun tr y of what you call the 'ban on social regression'. That is 
seen clearly as regards the reduction of the working week or 
reflation of the economy (despite the fact that a reduced 
working week is partly self-financing because of the likely 
increase in productivity and that it is offset by a reduction of 
the huge amounts spent on unemployment) . The British Prime 
Minister John Maj or understood this perfectly well when he said 
cynically: 'You will have the wage costs and we will have the 
jobs.' It has also been understood by the German employers 
who are starting to relocate some of their production in France, 
where the destruction of social rights is relatively more 
'advanced'. In fact, however, if it is true that competition is for 
the most part intra-European and that it is French workers 
taking jobs away from German workers, and vice versa -as is 
indeed the case, since almost three-qua rters of the external trade of 
Euro pean countries takes place within the confines of Euro pe -it 
can be seen that the effects of a reduced working week without 
loss of wages would be very limited if such a measure were 
decided and applied on a European scale. 
The same is true of policies for the revival of demand or for 
investment in the new technologies: though they may be 
impossible or ruinous, as the orthodoxy has it, so long as they 
are carried out in a single country, they become reasonable on 64 For a New Internationalism 
the scale of a continent. It is also true, more generally, of any 
action oriented by the principles of an economics of happiness, 
which would take account of all the profits and all the costs, 
material and symbolic, of human behaviours and in particular 
of activity or inactivity. In short, in place of the monetary 
Europe that is destroying social gains it is urgent that we put 
forward a social Europe based on an alliance between the 
workers of the various European countries, one that is capable 
of neutralizing attempts to use the workers of each country 
against the workers of all the others, in particular through 
'social dumping'. 
To achieve this, and to move beyond a mere abstract 
programme, it would be necessary to invent a new internation­
alism, a task which falls, first and foremost, to the trade union 
organizations. But internationalism, as well as having been 
discredited, in its traditional form, by its subordination to 
Soviet imperialism, comes up against great obstacles due to the 
fact that union structures are national ones (linked to the state 
and in part produced by the state), separated by different 
historical traditions . For example, in Germany, there is a strong 
autonomy of the 'social partners', whereas in France there is a 
tradition of weak trade unions facing a strong state. Equally, 
the welfare system takes very different forms, from Britain 
where it is financed by taxation to Germany and France where 
it is paid for by contributions. At the European level, there is 
almost nothing. What is called 'social Europe" which is oflittle 
interest to the 'guardians of the euro" amounts to a few grand 
principles, with for example the Community Charter of Funda­
mental Social Rights defining a set of minimum standards, with 
implementation being left to the discretion of member states. 
The social protocol annexed to the Maastricht treaty provides 
for the adoption by qualified majority of directives in the areas For a New Internationalism 65 
of working conditions, information to and consultation of 
workers, and equal treatment of men and women. It also gave 
the European 'social partners' the option to negotiate collective 
agreements which, when adopted by the Council of Ministers, 
have the force of law. 
All that is well and good, but where is the European social 
force capable of imposing such agreements on the European 
employers? The international structures, such as the European 
Trade Union Confederation, are weak (for example, they 
exclude a number of unions such as the CG T) in the face of 
organized employers, and, paradoxically, they almost always 
leave the initiative to the Com munity institutions (and the 
technocrats), even when social rights are at stake. The Euro­
pean works councils could be a powerful recourse, as has been 
seen in some conflicts within multinational corporations, but 
they are only consultative bodies and are hindered by the 
differences of interest which divide them within, or which set 
them against each other between one country and another. The 
European coordination of workers' struggles has a lot of ground 
to make up. The trade union organizations have missed some 
major opportunities, such as the strike in Germany for the 35-
hour week, which was not taken up at the European level, or 
the great mobilizations which occurred in France in late 1995 
and early 1996, against the austerity policy and the dismantling 
of the public services. The intellectuals especially in Germany 
-have remained silent, when they have not simply echoed the 
dominant discourse. 
How are the foundations to be laid for a new internationalism 
among the trade unions, the intellectuals and the peoples of 
Europe? There are two possible forms of action, and they are 
not mutually exclusive . One is the mobilization of the peoples, 
which presupposes, in this case, a specific contribution by the 66 For a New Internationalism 
intellectuals in as much as demobilization partly results from 
the demoralization produced by the permanent action of 
'propaganda' by essayists and journalists, a propaganda which 
neither the authors nor the recipients perceive as such. The 
social bases for the success of such a mobilization exist: I will 
only mention the effects of the transformations of the educa­
tional system, with, in particular, the rising levels of education, 
the devaluation of qualifications and the resulting structural 
deskilling, and also the blurring of the separation between 
students and manual workers (there is still a separation between 
the old and the young, between those in secure jobs and those 
facing job insecurity or proletarianization, but real connections 
have been made, through, for example, educated manual 
workers' children affected by the crisis). But also, and above all, 
there is the evolution of the social structure, with -contrary to 
the myth of the enormous middle class, which is so widespread 
in Germany -the growth in social inequality, the overall income 
from capital having risen by 60 per cent while the income from 
waged labour has remained stable. This action of international 
mobilization presupposes that an important role is given to the 
battle of ideas (breaking with the ouvrieriste tradition which 
pervades social movements, especially in France, and which 
refuses to give intellectual struggles their rightful place in social 
struggles), and in particular to critique of the representations 
continuously produced and propagated by the dominant groups 
and their lackeys in the media: false statistics, myths about full 
employment in Britain or the US, and so on. 
The second form of intervention in favour of an internation­
alism capable of promoting a transnational social state is action 
on and through the national states, which, at the present time, 
for lack of an overall vision of the future, are incapable of 
managing the general interest of the Community. We have to For a New Internationalism 67 
act on the national states, firstly to defend and strengthen the 
historical advances associated with the national states (which 
are greatest and most rooted in people's minds where the state 
has been strongest, as in France); and secondly to force these 
states to work for the creation of a European social state 
combining the greatest social advances of the various national 
states (more nurseries, schools and hospitals, fewer soldiers, 
policemen and prisons) and to subordinate the creation of the 
single market to the implementation of the social measures 
designed to counter the likely social consequences that un­
bridled competition will have for wage-earners. (We might take 
example here from Sweden which has rejected entry into the 
euro until there is a renegotiation giving priority to the 
coordination of economic and social policies .) Social cohesion is 
as important a goal as stable exchange rates and social 
harmonization is the precondition for the success of a genuine 
monetary union. 
If social harmonization, and the solidarity that it produces 
and presupposes, are made an absolute precondition, then a 
number of common objectives must be negotiated immediately, 
with the same concern for rigour hitherto reserved for economic 
indicators (such as the sacrosanct 3 per cent in the Maastricht 
Treaty): these include the definition of minimum wages (differ­
entiated by zones to take account of regional disparities); 
bringing in measures against the corru ption and tax fraud which 
reduce the contribution of financial activities to public spend­
ing, indirectly resulting in excessive taxation of labour, and 
against social dumping between directly competing activities; 
drawing up a code of common social rights which, while accepting 
a transitional differentiation between zones, would aim to 
integrate social policies by merging them where they exist and 
developing them where they do not exist, with for example the 68 For a New Internationalism 
definition of a minimum income for persons without paid 
employment and without other resources, reduction of employ­
ees' contributions, development of social rights such as training, 
the definition of the right to employment and housing and the 
invention of an external policy in social matters aimed at 
spreading and generalizing European social standards; a com­
mon investment polic y correspon ding to the general interest - in 
contrast to the investment strategies resulting from the 
autonomization of financial activities that are purely specula­
tive and/or directed towards short-term profit, or based on 
assumptions totally contrary to the general interest, such as the 
belief that reductions in employment are an index of good 
management and a guarantee of efficiency, priority would be 
given to strategies aimed at safeguarding non-renewable re­
sources and the environment, developi ng trans-European trans­
port and energy networks, developing public housing and urban 
regeneration (especially through non-polluting urban trans­
port), investment in research and development in health and the 
protection of the environment, the financing of new and 
apparently more risky activities, in forms unknown to the 
financial world (small businesses, self-employment ).! 
What may look like a simple catalogue of disparate measures 
is in fact inspired by the will to break out of the fatalism of neo­
liberal thinking, to 'defatalize' by politicizing, by replacing the 
naturalized economy of neo-liberalism with an economy of 
happiness, based on human initiatives and will, making allow­
ance in its calculations for the costs in suffering and the profits 
in fulfilment that are ignored by the strictly economistic cult of 
productivity and profitability. 
The future of Europe depends a great deal on the strength of 
the progressive forces in Germany (trade unions, SPD, Greens) 
and on their will and capacity to resist the 'strong euro' policy For a New Internationalism 69 
advocated by the Bundesb ank and the German government. It 
will also depend on their capacity to stimulate and relay the 
movement for a reorientation of European policy which is 
already making itself heard in several countries, in particular in 
France. In short, against all the prophets of misery who want 
to convince you that your destiny is in the hands of transcend­
ent, independent, indifferent powers, such as 'the financial 
markets' or the mechanisms of 'globalization' ,I want to declare, 
with the hope of convincing you, that the future, your future, 
which is also our future, that of all Europeans, depends a great 
deal on you, as Germans and as trade unionists. 
Frank furt, June 1997 
Notes 
1 I borrow a number of these suggestions from Yves Salesse, 
Propositions pour une autre Euro pe: construire Babel. Return to Television 
Q In your book Sur la television, you say that it is neces sary to 
awaken the consciousness of media professionals to the invisible 
structures of broadcasting. Do you think that the professionals and 
the public are really still so blind to the mechanisms of the media 
in a world in which the media are so present? Or is there complicity 
between them? 
PB 1 don't think the professionals are blind. 1 think they live 
in a state of dual consciousness: a practical view which leads 
them to get as much as they can, sometimes cynically, 
sometimes without realizing it, out of the possibilities offered by 
the media tool at their disposal (I am talking about the most 
powerf ul of them); and a theoretical view, moralizing and full of 
indulgence towards themselves, which leads them to deny 
publicly what they do, to mask it and even mask it from 
themselves. Two items of evidence: the reactions to my little 
book, which the 'leading commentators' unanimously and 
Interview with P. R. Pires, in 0 Clobo (Rio de Janeiro), 4 Oct. 1997, after the 
publication of the Portuguese translation of Sur fa television. Return to Television 71 
violently condemned as outrageous while proclaiming each more 
insistently than the other that it contained nothing that was not 
already known (a truly Freudian logic which I also saw in the 
reactions to my books on education); and the pontificating, 
hypocritical commentaries they produced on the role of the 
journalists in the death of Princess Diana while themselves 
allowing the journalistic possibilities of this non-event to be 
exploited beyond the bounds of decency. This split consciousness 
-very common among the powerful ... it was said that the 
Roman augurs could not look at each other without laughing­
means that they can both condemn the objective description of 
their practice as a scandalous denunciation or a poisonous 
pamphlet, and say equivalent things out loud when sp eaking 
privately or even for the benefit of the sociologist who interviews 
them (I give examples of this in my book) or indeed even in 
public statements. Thus Thomas Ferenczi writes in Le Monde of 
7-8 September, in response to readers' complaints about the 
paper's treatment of the Princess Diana story, that, yes, 'Le 
Monde has changed' and is d�voting more and more space to 
what he discreetly calls 'faits de societe' -just the truths which 
he could not bear to see uttered only three months earlier. At 
a time when the slippage, imposed by television, is there for all 
to see, the paper flaunts it, in the appropriately moralizing tone, 
as a way of adapting to modernity and 'enlarging its curiosity'! 
(Added in Januar y 1998: And the 'Ombudsman' [mediateur] 
specially mandated to fob off readers conscious of the ever­
growing weight of commercial preoccupations in editorial 
choices now deploys all his rhetoric to try to prove that one can 
be the judge in one's own case, while endlessly rehearsing the 
same tautological arguments . To those who, after the publica­
tion of an interview with a fading pop star by an insipid writer, I 
complain that Le Monde is 'drifting into a kind of demagogy', 72 Return to Television 
he can only reply, in the edition dated 18-19 January 1998, that 
his paper is 'committed to openness': 'These subjects, and 
others,' he writes, 'receive extensive coverage because they shed 
useful light on the world around us and because, for that very 
reason, they interest a large section of our readersh ip.' To those 
who, the previous week, condemned the indulgent report by a 
journalist-intellectual on the situation in Algeria, a betrayal of 
all the critical ideals of the tradition of the intellectual, he 
replies, in Le Monde dated 25-6 January 1998, that it is not for 
the journalist to choose between intellectu als. The texts thus 
produced, week after week, by the defender of the line of the 
newspaper, no doubt chosen for his extreme prudence, are the 
greatest imprudence of the paper: the deep unconscious of 
journalism is progressively revealed, as the readers make their 
challenges, in a kind of long weekly session of psychoanalysis .) 
So, split consciousness among the dominant professionals, the 
nomenklatura of star journalists bound together by common 
interests and complicities of all kinds.2 Among 'rank-and-f ile' 
journalists, the pieceworkers of journalism, the freelancers, all 
those who earn a precarious living by doing what is most 
authentically journalistic in journalism, there is, naturally, more 
lucidity and it is often expressed very directly. It's in part thanks 
to their testimony that it is possible to learn something about 
what goes on in the world of television.3 
Q You analyse the formation of what you call the 'journalistic 
field', but your point of view is that of the 'sociolog ical field'. Do 
you think there is an incompatibility between those two fields? Does 
sociolo gy present 'truths' and the media present 'lies'? 
PB You are introducing a dichotomy very characte ristic of 
the journalistic vision, which -it's one of its most typical Return to Television 73 
properties -is inclined to be Manichean. It goes without saying 
that journalists produce some truth and sociologists produce 
some untruth. In a field, you find everything, by definition! But 
perhaps in different proportions and with different probabili­
ties ... Having said that, the first task of the sociologist is to 
explode that way of formulating questions. And I say in my 
little book, several times, that sociologists can help lucid and 
critical journalists (there are a lot of them, but not necessarily 
in the top jobs in television, radio and the press) by providing 
them with instruments of knowledge and understan ding, per­
haps sometimes of action, that would enable them to work with 
some effectiveness towards withstanding the economic and 
social forces that bear on them, particula rly by allying with 
social science researchers, whom they often see as enemies. I'm 
currently trying (in particular through the magazine Liber) to 
crea te those kinds of interna tional connections between j ournal­
ists and researchers and to develop forces of resistanc e against 
the forces of oppression which weigh on journalism and which 
journalism brings to bear upon the whole of cultural production 
and, through that, the whole of society. 
Q Television is identi fied as a form of symbolic oppression. What 
is the democratic potential of television and the media ? 
PB There is an enormous gap between the image that media 
people have and give of the media and the reality of their action 
and influence. The media are, overall, a factor of depoliticization, 
which naturally acts more strongly on the most depoliticized 
sections of the public, on women more than men, on the less 
educated more than the more educated, on the poor more than 
the rich. It may be a scandalous thing to say this, but it is clearly 
established from statistical analysis of the probability of 74 Return to Television 
formulating an explicit response to a political question or of 
abstaining (the consequences of this fact, especially in politics, 
are explored at some length in my recent book Meditations 
pascaliennes ). Television (much more than the newspapers) 
offers an increasingly depoliticized, aseptic, bland view of the 
world, and it is increasingly dragging down the newspapers in 
its slide into demagogy and subordination to commercial values. 
The Princess Diana affair is a perfect example of everything I 
say in my book, a sort of paroxysm. It is all there at once: a 
'human interest' story that entertains; the telethon effect, by 
which I mean the uncontroversial defence of humanitarian 
causes that are vague, ecumenical and above all perfectly 
apolitical. You get the sense that with that event, coming just 
after the Pope's youth rally in Paris and just before the death 
of Mother Teresa, the last restraints gave way. (Mother Teresa, 
who so far as I know was no progressive in relation to abortion 
and women's liberation, fitted perfectly into this world gov­
erned by hard-nosed bankers, who have nothing against pious 
defenders of humanity who come and bandage the wounds 
which they see as inevitable and which they have helped to 
inflict.) And so we saw Le Monde, two weeks after the accident, 
devoting its main front-page story to the progress of the inquiry 
into the crash, while on the TV news the massacres in Algeria 
and relations between Israel and Palestine were relegated to a 
few minutes at the end of the programme. Incident ally, you 
were saying a moment ago, lies from journalists, truth from 
sociologists: I can tell you, as a sociologist who knows Algeria 
fairly well, that I have great admiration for the newspaper La 
Croix , which has recently published a very precise, rigorous and 
courageous dossier on what is really behind the massacres there. 
The question I ask myself -and so far the answer is negative 
-is whether the other newspapers, and in particular those which Return to Television 75 
make high claims for their seriousness, will pursue those 
analyses ... 
Q In terms ofthef amous dichotom y putf orward by Umberto Eco 
in the 1960s, could we say that you are 'apocalyptic' as opposed to 
'integrated '? 
PB It's a way of putting it. There are certainly a lot of 
'integrated' people about. And the strength of the new domi­
nant order is that it has found the specific means of , integrating' 
(in some cases you might say buying, in others seducing) an 
ever-growing fraction of the intellectuals, all over the world. 
These 'integrated' intellectuals often continue to see themselves 
as critical (or simply on the left), according to the traditional 
model. And that helps to give great symbolic efficacy to their 
work in rallying support for the established order. 
Q What is your opinion on the role of the media in the Diana 
affair? 
PB It's a perfect, almost uncannily extreme illustration of 
what I was describing in my book. The royal families of Monaco, 
England and elsewhere will be kept on as inexhaustible 
reservoirs of plots for soap operas and telenovelas. In any case 
it is clear that the great media 'happening' provoked by the 
death of Princess Diana fits perfectly into the series of 
entertainments which enthral the petite bourgeoisie of England 
and other countries, along with musicals like Evita or Jesus 
Christ Superstar, born of the marriage of melodrama and high­
tech special effects, mawkish TV serials, sentimental films, 
airport novels, 'music for easy listening', 'family entertain­
ments', and all those other products of the cultural industry, 76 Return to Television 
poured out all day long by conformist and cynical television and 
radio channels and combining the lachrymose moralism of the 
churches with the aesthetic conservatism of bourgeois enter­
tainments. 
Q What is the possible role of the intellectuals in the 'mediated' 
world? 
PB It is not certain that they can play the great positive role 
of the inspired prophet that they sometimes tend to take upon 
themselves in periods of euphoria. It would be at least 
something if they could refrain from entering into complicity 
and collaboration with the forces which threaten to destroy the 
very bases of their existence and their freedom, in other words 
the forces of the market. It took several centuries, as I showed 
in my book The Rules of Art, for jurists, artists, writers and 
scientists to gain their autonomy with respect to the political, 
religious and economic powers, and to be able to impose their 
own norms, their specific values, in particular of truth, in their 
own universe, their microcosm, and sometimes in the social 
world (Zola in the Dreyfus affair, Sartre and the 121 in the 
Algerian war, etc.). These conquests of freedom are sometimes 
threatened, and not only by colonels, dictators and mafias. 
They are threatened by more insidious forces, those of the 
market, but transfigured, reincarnated in models that seduce 
one group or another: for some, it is the figure of the economist 
armed with mathematical formalism, who describes the evolu­
tion of the 'globalized' economy as a destiny; for others, the 
figure of the international star of rock, pop or rap, presenting 
a lifestyle that is both chic and facile (for the first time in 
history, the seductions of snobbery have become attached to 
practices and products typical of mass consumption, such as Return to Television 77 
denim, T-shirts and Coca-Cola); for others a 'campus radicalism' 
labelled postmodern and offering the seductive glamour of 
seemingly revolutionary celebration of cultural pick-and-mix, 
and so on. If there is one area where the 'globalization' that is 
on the lips of all 'integrated' intellectuals is a reality, it is 
precisely that of cultural mass production -television (I'm 
thinking in particular of the telenovelas that have become a 
Latin American speciality and which propagate a 'Diana' view 
of the world), popular cinema and magazines, or even, which is 
much more serious, 'social thinking' for the 'quality press', with 
themes and words that circle the planet, like 'the end of history' , 
'postmodernism', or ... 'globalization'. Artists, writers and 
researchers (especially sociologists) have the capacity, and the 
duty, to combat the most malign of the threats that this global 
production implies for culture and democracy. 
Notes 
1 Johnny Halliday, interviewed by Daniel Rondeau (trans.). 
2 On these complicities, see Halimi, Les Nouveaux Chiens de 
garde. 
3 See for example the excellent analyses presented in Accardo 
et aI., lournalistes au quotidien: outils pour une socioanal yse 
des pratiques journalistiques. The Gover nment Finds the 
Peo ple Irres ponsible 
We have had enough of the slipperiness and prevarication of all 
the politicians, elected by us, who declare us 'irresponsible' 
when we remind them of the promises they made us. We have 
had enough of the state racism which they authorize. This very 
day, a friend of mine, a French citizen of Algerian origin, told 
me what happened to his daughter when she went to re-enrol 
at the university: at the mere sight of her Arab-looking name, 
the university employee asked her, as ifit were the most natural 
thing in the world, to show her papers and her passport. To put 
an end once and for all to all these bullyings and humiliations, 
which would have been unthinkable a few years ago, we need 
to make a clear break with hypocritical legislation which is no 
more than an immense concession to the xenophobia of the 
Front National. This naturally means repealing the Pasqua and 
Debre laws, but above all it means putting an end to all the 
hypocritical language of all the politicians who, at a time when 
Text published in Les Inrockuptibles, 8 Oct. 1997, on the bills of ministers 
Guigou (Justice) and Chevimement (Int erior) on French nationality and the 
residence of foreigners in France. The Government Finds the People Irresponsible 79 
the country is being reminded of the implication of the French 
authorities in the extermination of the Jews, practi.cally give a 
free hand to all those in the administration who are in a position 
to express their most stupidly xenophobic impulses, like the 
university employee I mentioned a moment ago. There is no 
point in engaging in subtle legal discussions about the merits of 
this or that law. What we must do is simply repeal a law which, 
by its very existence, legitimates the discriminatory practices 
of civil servants, at every level, by helping to cast a generalized 
suspicion on foreigners -and not just any foreigners, of course. 
What does it mean to be a citizen if at any moment proof of 
citizenship has to be produced? (Many French parents of 
Algerian origin wonder what first names they should give their 
children to spare them problems later. And the employee who 
harassed my friend's daughter expressed surprise that she was 
called Melanie ... ) 
I say that a law is racist when it authorizes any civil servant 
to cast doubt on the citizenship of a citizen at the mere sight of 
her face or the sound of her name, as happens now, thousands 
of times every day. It is regrettable that in the highly controlled 
government which has been offered to us by Mr J ospin, there is 
not a single bearer of one of the stigmata subject to the 
irreproachable arbitrariness of the functionaries of the French 
state, a black face or an Arabic-so unding name, to remind Mr 
Chevimement that there is a difference between law and 
behaviour and that there are laws which authorize the worst 
behaviour. I offer all this for consideration by all those who are 
now silent and indifferent and who will come back in thirty years 
to express their 'repentan ce"l at a time when young French 
citizens of Algerian origin will have the first name Kelka1.2 
Paris, October 1997 80 The Government Finds the People Irresponsible 
Notes 
1 The French bishops have collectively expressed their 'repent­
ance' over the attitude of the French hierarchy during the 
German occupation (trans.). 
2 Kelkal is the name of a young Algerian, a member of a 
terrorist network, who was shot by the police (trans.). Job Insecurit y is 
Ever ywhere Now 
The collective thinking that has gone on here in the last two 
days is an entirely original undertaking, because it has brought 
together people who have little opportunity to meet and 
exchange their views -civil servants and politicians, trade 
unionists, economists and sociologists, people in jobs, often 
insecure ones, and people without jobs. 1 would like to comment 
on some of the problems which have been discussed. The first 
one, which is tacitly excluded from academic meetings, is: what 
is the final outcome of these debates, or, more brutally, what 
is the point of all these intellectual discussions? Paradox ically, 
it is the academics who most worry about this question or whom 
this question most worries (1 am thinking in particular of the 
economists here present, who are rather unrepresentative of a 
profession in which very few are concerned with social reality 
or indeed with reality at all) who have had it put most directly 
to them (and it is undoubtedly a good thing that this should be 
so). Both brutal and naive, it reminds the academics of their 
Intervention at the Rencontres Europeennes contre la Precarite, Grenoble, 
12-13 Dec. 1997. 82 Job Insecurity is Everywhere Now 
responsibiliti es, which may be very great, at least when, by their 
silence or their complicity, they contribute to the maintenance 
of the symbolic order which is the condition of the functioning 
of the economic order. 
It has emerged clearly that job insecurity is now everywhere: 
in the private sector, but also in the public sector, which has 
greatly increased the number of temporary, part-time or casual 
positions; in industry, but also in the institutions of cultural 
production and diffusion -education, journalism, the media, 
etc. In all these areas it produces more or less identical effects, 
which become particularly visible in the extreme case of the 
unemploye d: the de structuring of existence, which is deprived 
among other things of its temporal structures, and the ensuing 
deterioration of the whole relationship to the world, time and 
space. Casualization profoundly affects the person who suffers 
it: by making the whole future uncertain, it prevents all rational 
anticipation and, in particular, the basic belief and hope in the 
future that one needs in order to rebel, especially collectively, 
against present conditions, even the most intolerable. 
Added to these effects of precariousness on those directly 
touched by it there are the effects on all the others, who are 
apparently spared. The awareness of it never goes away: it is 
present at every moment in everyone's mind (except, no doubt, 
in the minds of the liberal economists, perhaps because, as one 
of their theoretical opponents has pointed out, they enjoy the 
protection afforded by tenured positions ... ). It pervades both 
the conscious and the unconscious mind. The existence of a large 
reserve army, which, because of the overproduction of gradu­
ates, is no longer restricted to the lowest levels of competence 
and technical qualification, helps to give all those in work the 
sense that they are in no way irreplaceable and that their work, 
their jobs, are in some way a privilege, a fragile, threatened Job Insecurity is Everywhere Now 83 
privilege (as they are reminded by their employers as soon as 
they step out ofline and by journalists and commentators at the 
first sign of a strike). Objective insecurity gives rise to a 
generalized subjective insecurity which is now affecting all 
workers in our highly developed economy. This kind of 
'collective mentality' (I use this expression, although I do not 
much like it, to make myself understood), common to the whole 
epoch, is the origin of the demoralization and loss of militancy 
which one can observe (as I did in Algeria in the 1960s) in 
underdeveloped countries suffering very high rates of unem­
ployment or underemployment and permanently haunted by 
the spectre of joblessness. 
The unemployed and the casualized workers, having suffered 
a blow to their capacity to project themselves into the future, 
which is the precondition for all so-called rational conducts, 
starting with economic calculation, or, in a quite different 
realm, political organization, are scarcely capable of being 
mobilized. Paradox ically, as I showed in Travail et travailleurs 
en Algerie,l my oldest and perhaps most contemporary book, in 
order to conceive a revolutionary project, in other words a 
reasoned ambition to transform the present by reference to a 
projected future, one needs some grasp on the present. The 
proletarian, unlike the subprolet arian, does have this basic 
minimum of present assurances, security, which is needed in 
order to conceive the ambition of changing the present with an 
eye to the future. But, let me say in passing, the worker is also 
someone who has something to defend, something to lose, a job, 
even if it is exhausting and badly paid, and a number of the 
things the worker does, sometimes described as too prudent or 
even conservative, spring from the fear of falling lower, back 
into the subproletariat. 
When unemployment rises to very high levels, as it has in a 84 Job Insecurity is Everywhere Now 
number of European countries, and when job insecurity affects 
a very high proportion of the population -manual workers, 
clerical workers in commerce and industry, but also journalists, 
teachers and students, work becomes a rare commodity, 
desirable at any price, which puts employees at the mercy of 
employers, who exploit and abuse the power this gives them. 
Competition for work tends to generate a struggle of all against 
all, which destroys all the values of solidarity and humanity, 
and sometimes produces direct violence. Those who deplore the 
cynicism of the men and women of our time should not omit to 
relate it to the economic and social conditions which favour or 
demand it and which reward it. 
So insecurity acts directly on those it touches (and whom it 
renders incapable of mobilizing themselves) and indirectly on all 
the others, through the fear it arouses, which is methodically 
exploited by all the insecurity- inducing strategies, such as the 
introduction of the notorious 'flexibilit y', -which, it will have 
become clear, is inspired as much by political as economic 
reasons. One thus begins to suspect that insecurity is the 
product not of an economic inevitability, identified with the 
much-heralded 'globalization', but of a political will. A 'flexible' 
company in a sense deliberately exploits a situation of insecu­
rity which it helps to reinforce: it seeks to reduce its costs, but 
also to make this lowering possible by putting the workers in 
permanent danger of losing their jobs. The whole world of 
production, material and cultural, public and private, is thus 
carried along by a process of intensification of insecurity, with, 
for example, the deterritorialization of the company. An industry 
previously linked to a nation-state or a region (Detroit or Turin 
for automobiles) tends increasingly to detach itself through 
what is caned the 'network corporation" organized on a 
continental or world scale and linking production segments, Job Insecurity is Everywhere Now 85 
technological know-how, communication networks and train­
ing facilities scattered between very distant places. 
By facilitating or organizing the mobility of capital and 
'delocalization' towards the countries with the lowest wages, 
neo-liberal policies have helped to extend competition among 
workers to a global level. The national (and perhaps national­
ized) company, whose field of competition was more or less 
strictly limited to the national territory, and which went out to 
win markets abroad, has given way to the multinational 
corporation which places workers in competition no longer just 
with their compatriots or even, as the demagogues claim, with 
the foreigners installed on the national territory, who are in fact 
clearly the first victims of loss of security, but with workers on 
the other side of the world, who are forced to accept poverty­
line wages. 
Casualization of employment is part of a mode of domination 
of a new kind, based on the creation of a generalized and 
permanent state of insecurity aimed at forcing workers into 
submission, into the acceptance of exploitation. To characterize 
this mode of domination, which, although in its effects it closely 
resembles the wild capitalism of the early days, is entirely 
unprecedented, a speaker here proposed the very appropriate 
and expressive concept of flexploitatio n. The word evokes very 
well this rational management of insecurity which, especially 
through the concerted manipulation of the space of production, 
sets up competition between the workers of the countries with 
the greatest social gains and the best organized union resistance 
-features that are linked to a national territory and history -
and the workers of the socially least advanced countries, and so 
breaks resistance and obtains obedience and submission, through 
apparently natural mechanisms which thus serve as their own 
justification. These submissive dispositions produced by insecur-86 Job Insecurity is Everywhere Now 
ity are the prerequisite for an increasingly 'successf ul' exploi­
tation, based on the division between the growing number who 
do not work and the diminishing number of those who work, but 
who work more and more. So it seems to me that what is 
presented as an economic system governed by the iron laws of 
a kind of social nature is in reality a political system which can 
only be set up with the active or passive complicity of the 
officially political powers. 
Against this political system, political struggle is possible. In 
the form of charitable or militant activity, it can first aim to 
encourage the victims of exploitation, all the present and 
potential victims of insecurity, to work together against the 
destructive effects of insecurity (by helping them to live, to 
'hold on', to save their dignity, to resist destructuring, loss of 
self-respect, alienation) and above all to mobilize on an 
international scale, that is to say at the same level at which the 
policy of inducing insecurity exerts its effects, so as to combat 
this policy and neutralize the competition it seeks to create 
between the workers of different countries. But it can also try 
to help workers to break away from the logic of past struggles 
which, being based on the demand for work and for better pay 
for work, trap them within work and within the exploitation (or 
flexploitation) which accompanies it. This implies a redistribu­
tion of work (through a significant reduction in the working 
week throughout Europe), inseparable from a redefinition of the 
distribution between production time and reproduction time, 
rest and leisure. 
This revolution would have to start with the abandonment 
of the narrowly calculating and individualistic view which 
reduces agents to calculators concerned with resolving prob­
lems, strictly economic problems in the narrowest sense of the 
word. In order for the economic system to function, the workers Job Insecurity is Everywhere Now 87 
have to bring into it their own conditions of production and 
reproduction, but also what is needed for the economic system 
itself to function, starting with their belief in the company, in 
work, in the necessity of work, and so on. These are all things 
that the orthodox economists exclude a priori from their 
abstract and partial accountancy, tacitly leaving the responsi­
bility for the production and reproduction of all the hidden 
economic and social requirements for the economy as they know 
it to individuals or, paradoxically, to the state, of which they 
otherwise urge the destruction. 
Grenoble, December 1997 
Notes 
1 Bourdieu, Travail et travailleurs en Algerie; Bourdieu, Algeria 
1960. The Protest Movement of 
the Unem ployed, a Social 
Miracle 
This movement of the unemployed is a unique, extraordinary 
event. Contrary to what we are told, day in, day out, on 
television and in the newspapers, this French exception is 
something we can be proud of. All the research on unemploy­
ment has shown that it destroys its victims, wiping out their 
defences and their subversive dispositions. If that inevitability 
has been overturned, it is thanks to the tireless work of 
individuals and associations which have encouraged, supported 
and organized the movement. I cannot help finding it extraor­
dinary that left-wing politicians or trade unionists talk of 
manipulation (in the same terms in which nineteenth- century 
employers denounced the early trade unions) where they ought 
to recognize the virtues of the work of activists, without which, 
it is clear, there would never have been anything resembling a 
social movement. For my part, I want to express my admiration 
and gratitude -all the greater because what they were taking 
on often seemed to me hopeless -for all those, in the unions and 
Remarks on 17 Jan. 1998, at the time of the occupation of the Ecole Normale 
Superieure by the unemployed. A Social Miracle 89 
associations brought together in the Etats Generaux du 
Mouvement Social, who have made possible what is truly a 
social miracle, the virtues and benefits of which will be long­
lasting. 
The first conquest of this movement is the movement itself, 
its very existence: it pulls the unemployed, and with them all 
insecure workers, whose number increases daily, out of in vi sibil­
ity, isolation, silence, in short, out of non-existence. Re­
emerging into the light of day, the unemployed give back their 
existence and some pride in themselves to all the men and 
women that non-employment consigns, like them, to oblivion 
and shame. Above all they remind us that one of the founda­
tions of the present economic and social order is mass unemploy­
ment and the threat this implies for all those who still have a 
job. Far from being wrapped up in an egoistic movement, they 
are saying that even if no unemployed person is quite like 
another, the differences between people on welfare-to-work 
schemes, the unemployed whose benefits have expired or those 
receiving specific allowances, are not radically different from 
those between the unemployed and all insecure workers. This 
is a reality which tends to be masked and forgotten when the 
emphasis is put on the (so to speak) 'sectional' claims of the 
unemployed, which are liable to separate them from the 
employed, especially those in the most insecure positions, who 
may feel forgotten. 
Moreover, unemployment and the unemployed haunt work 
and the worker. Short-term, part-time and temporary workers 
of every category, in industry, commerce, education, entertain­
ment, even if there are immense differences between them and 
the unemployed and also between themselves, all live in fear of 
unemployment and, very often, under the threat of the 
blackmail that can be used against them. Instability of 90 A Social Miracle 
employment opens up new strategies of domination and 
exploitation, based on intimidation through the threat of 
redundancy, which occurs now at all levels of the hierarchy, in 
private and even public enterprises and which subjects the 
whole world of work, especially those in the cultural sector, to 
a crushing censorship that forbids mobilization and takes away 
bargaining power. The generalized worsening of working condi­
tions is made possible or even favoured by unemployment and 
it is because they are obscurely aware of this that so many 
French people feel and express solidarity with the struggle of the 
unemployed. That is why it is possible to say, without playing 
with words, that the mobilization of those whose existence is 
undoubtedly the main factor in a loss of militancy is the most 
extraordinary encouragement to mobilization, to the rejection 
of political fatalism. 
The movement of the French unemployed is also a call to all 
the unemployed and all the casualized workers of the whole of 
Europe: a new subversive idea has appeared on the scene, and 
it can become an instrument of struggle available to every 
national movement. The unemployed are reminding all workers 
that their interests are bound up with those of the unemployed; 
that the unemployed whose existence weighs so heavily on them 
and on their working conditions are the product of a policy; that 
a mobilization capable of overcoming the frontiers that exist, 
in every country, between workers and non-wor kers and the 
frontiers between all the workers and non-wor kers of one 
country and the workers and non-workers of every other 
country could counter the policy which can mean that the non­
workers can force silence and resignation on those who have the 
dubious 'privilege' of a more or less precarious employment. 
Paris, January 1998 The Negative Intellectual 
All those who have been there, day after day, year after year, to 
receive Algerian refugees, to listen to them, help them draw up 
a curriculum vitae and go through the formalities in the 
ministrie s, to accompa ny them to court, to write letters to the 
authorities, to go in delegations to see officials, to apply for visas, 
authorizations and residence permits, who were mobilized, as 
soon as the first murders started in June 1993, not only to provide 
help and protection so far as was possible, but to try to inform 
themselves and inform others, to understand and explain a 
complex reality, who have fought tirelessly, through public 
declarations, press conferences and newspaper articles, to rescue 
the Algerian crisis from one-sided interpretations, all the intellec­
tuals of all countries who have come together to fight indifference 
or xenophobia, to reinstate respect for the complexity of the 
world by untangling the confusions that some people deliberately 
maintain, have suddenly discovered that all their efforts could be 
undone, swept away, in two strokes, three movements. 
This text was written in January 1998; it is published for the first time in this 
volume. 92 The Negative Intellectual 
Two articles! written after a journey planned, mapped out, 
escorted and watched over by the Algerian authorities or army, 
and published in the most respected French newspaper, though 
full of platitudes and errors and entirely oriented towards a 
simplistic conclusion calculated to give satisfaction to superfi­
cial pity and racist hatred, masked as humanist indignation; a 
unanimist public meeting bringing together the cream of the 
media intelligentsia and the political class, from the fundament­
alist liberal and the opportunist ecologist to the passionaria of 
the 'eradicators';2 a television programme which is entirely one­
sided under the appearance of neutrality -and the trick is pulled 
off. Everything is back to zero. The negative intellectual has 
done his job: who could want to express solidarity with mass 
murderers and rapists -especially when they are people who are 
described, without historical justification, as 'madmen of 
Islam', enveloped under the abominated name of Islamicism, 
the quintessence of all Oriental fanaticism, designed to give 
racist contempt the impeccable alibi of ethical and secular 
legitimacy? 
To pose the problem in such terms, you don't need to be a 
great intellectual. And yet that is how the originator of this 
crude operation of symbolic policing, which is the absolute 
antithesis of everything that defines the intellectual -freedom 
with respect to those in power, the critique of received ideas, the 
demolition of simplistic either-ors, respect for the complexity of 
problems -has come to be consecrated by journalists as an 
intellectual in the full sense of the word. 
And yet I know all kinds of people who, though they know 
all that very well, because they have grappled countless times 
with those forces, will start again, each in their own way and 
with their own means, on work that is always liable to be 
destroyed by a thoughtless, frivolous or malicious article or to The Negative Intellectual 93 
be annexed, if it succeeds, by opportunists and eleventh-hour 
converts; who will persist in writing corrections, refutations and 
rebuttals destined to be overwhelmed by the uninterrupted flow 
of media chatter, because they are convinced that - as we have 
seen from the movement of the unemployed, the fruition of 
obscure efforts, sometimes so desperate that they seem to be the 
art for art's sake of politics -one can, in the long run, give a 
push to the rock of Sisyphus without it rolling back. 
They do so because, meanwhile, politicians who are skilled in 
neutralizing the social movements that have brought them to 
power continue to leave thousands of 'unauthorized' immi­
grants without an answer or to deport them to the country from 
which they have fled, which could be Algeria. 
Paris, Januar y 1998 
Notes 
1 By Bernard Henri-Levy, in Le Monde (trans.). 
2 This is a reference to Khalida Messaoudi, co-author (with 
Elisabeth Schemla) of Une Algerienne debout: entretiens 
(Paris, Flammarion, 1995) (trans.). Neo -liberalism, the Uto pia 
(Beco ming a Reality) of 
Unlimited Exploitation 
Is the economic world really, as the dominant discourse would 
have us believe, a pure and perfect order, implacably unfolding 
the logic of its predictable consequences and promptly repress­
ing all deviations from its rules through the sanctions it inflicts, 
either automatically or, more exceptionally, through its armed 
agent, the IMF or the OECD and the drastic policies they 
impose -reduced labour costs, cuts in public spending and a 
more 'flexible' labour market? What if it were, in reality, only 
the implementation of a utopia, neo-liberalism, thus converted 
into a political programme, but a utopia which, with the aid of 
the economic theo ry to which it subscribes, manages to see itself 
as the scientific description of reality? 
This tutelary theory is a pure mathematical fiction, based, 
from the outset, on a gigantic abstraction, which, contrary to 
what economists who defend their right to inevitable abstrac­
tion like to think, cannot be reduced to the effect -constitutive 
of every scientific project -of object construction as a 
deliberately selective apprehension of the real. This abstraction, 
performed in the name of a strict and narrow view of rationality, 
identified with individual rationality, consists in bracketing off Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 95 
the economic and social conditions of rational dispositions (and 
in particular those of the calculating disposition applied to 
economic matters which is the basis of the neo-liberal view) and 
of the economic and social structures which are the condition 
of their exercise, or, more precisely, of the production and 
reproduction of those dispositions and those str1!ctures. To 
appreciate the scale of the omission, one only has to think of the 
educational system, which is never taken into account as such 
at a time when it plays a decisive role both in the production 
of goods and services and in the production of producers. From 
this original fault, inscribed in the Walrasian1 myth of 'pure 
theory', flow all the omissions and shortcomings of the disci­
pline of economics, and the deadly stubbornness with which it 
clings to the arbitrary opposition it causes to exist, by its very 
existence, between specifically economic logic -based on 
competition and promising efficiency - and social logic, subject 
to the rule of equity. 
Having said this, this initially desocialized and dehistoricized 
'theory' has, now more than ever, the means of mak ing itself 
true, empirically falsifiable. For neo-liberal discourse is not a 
discourse like others. Like psychiat ric discourse in the asylum, 
as described by Erving Goffman,2 it is a 'strong discours e' 
which is so strong and so hard to fight because it has behind it 
all the powers of a world of power relations which it helps to 
make as it is, in particular by orienting the economic choices of 
those who dominate economic relations and so adding its own 
specifically symbolic -force to those power relations. In the 
name of the scientific programme of knowledge, converted into 
a political programme of action, an immense political op eration 
is being pursued (denied, because it is apparently purely 
negative), aimed at creating the conditions for realizing and 
operating of the 'theory'; a programme of methodical destruction 96 Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 
of collectives (neo-classical economics recognizes only individu­
als, whether it is dealing with companies, trade unions or 
families). 
The movement, made possible by the policy of financial 
deregulation, towards the neo-liberal utopia of a pure, perfect 
market takes place through the transforming and, it has to be 
said, destructive action of all the political measures (the most 
recent being the MAl, the Multilateral Agreement on Invest­
ment, intended to protect foreign companies and their invest­
ments against national governments) aimed at puttin g into 
question all the collective structures capable of obstructing the 
logic of the pure market: the nation-state, whose room for 
manoeuvre is steadily shrinking; work groups, with for example 
the individualization of salaries and careers on the basis of 
individual perform ance and the consequent atomization of 
workers; collectives defending workers' rights -unions, societies 
and cooperatives; even the family, which, through the segmen­
tation of the market into age groups, loses some of its control 
over consumption. Der iving its social force from the political 
and economic strength of those whose interests it defends -
shareholders, financial operators, industrial ists, conservative 
politicians or social democrats converted to the cosy capitula­
tions of laissez-faire, senior officials of the financial ministries, 
who are all the more determined to impose a policy implying 
their own redundancy because, unlike private-sector execu­
tives, they run no risk of suffering the consequences -the neo­
liberal programme tends overall to favour the separation 
between the economy and social realities and so to construct, 
in reality, an economic system corresponding to the theoretical 
description, in other words a kind of logical machine, which 
presents itself as a chain of constraints impelling the economic 
agents. Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 97 
The globalization of financial markets, combined with the 
progress of information technology, ensures an unprecedented 
mobility of capital and gives investors (or shareholders) con­
cerned about their immediate interests, that is the short-term 
profitabi lity of their investments, the possibility of continu­
ously comparing the profitability of the largest companies and 
appropriately sanctioning relative failure. Companies them­
selves, exposed to this permanent threat, have to adjust ever 
more rapidly to the demands of the markets, for fear of 'losing 
the confidence of the markets' and with it the support of 
shareholders who, with their eyes fixed on short-term profitabil­
ity, are increasingly able to impose their will on the managers, 
to lay down guidelines for them, through the finance depart­
ments, and to shape their policies on recruitment, employment 
and wages. This leads to the absolute reign of flexibility, with 
recruitment on short-term contracts or on a temporary basis 
and repeated 'downsizin g', and the creation, within the com­
pany itself, of competition between autonomous 'profit centres', 
between teams, forced into providing all their own services, and 
finally, between individuals, through the individualization of 
the wage relation. This comes through the setting of individual 
objectives; individual appraisal interviews; personal increments 
or bonuses based on individual competence or merit; individu­
alized career paths; strategies of'responsibilization' tending to 
secure the self-exploitation of some managers who, while 
remaining wage-earners subject to strong hierarchical author­
ity, are at the same time held responsible for their sales, their 
products, their branch, their shop, etc., like 'independent' 
proprietors; the demand for 'self-appraisal' which extends the 
'involvement' of employees, in accordance with the techniques 
of 'participatory management ', far beyond the executive level 
- all methods of rational control which, while imposing over-98 Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 
investment in work, and not only in posts of responsibility, and 
work under the pressures of urgency, combine to weaken or 
destroy collective references and solidarity. 3 
The practical instituting of a Darwinian world in which the 
springs of commitment to the job and the company are found 
in insecurity, suffering and stress4 would undoubtedly not 
succeed so completely if it did not benefit from the complicity 
of the destabilized habitus produced by insecurity and the 
existence -at all levels of the hierarchy, even the highest, 
especially among executives -of a reserve army of labour made 
docile by insecure employment and the permanent threat of 
unemployment . The ultimate basis of this economic order 
placed under the banner of individual freedom is indeed the 
structural violence of unemployment, of insecure employment 
and of the fear provoked by the threat of losing employment. 
The condition of the 'harmonious' functioning of the individu­
alist micro-economic model and the principle of individual 
'motivation' at work lie, in the final analysis, in a mass 
phenomenon, the existence of the reserve army of the unem­
ployed -though the term 'army' is inappropriate, because 
unemployment isolates, atomizes, individualiz es, demobilizes 
and strips away solidarity. 
This structural violence also bears on what is called the work 
contract (wilfully rationalized and derealized by the 'theory of 
contracts '). Corporate discourse has never spoken so much 
about trust, cooperation, loyalty and corporate culture as now 
when the worker's unremitting commitment is obtained by 
sweeping away all temporal guarantees (three-quarters of new 
hirings are on short-term contracts, the proportion of insecure 
jobs rises steadily, restrictions on individual redundancies are 
being removed). This commitment is, moreover, necessarily 
uncertain and ambiguous, since casualization, fear of redun-Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 99 
dancy, downsizing can, like unemployment, generate anxiety, 
demoralization or conformism (faults which the managerial 
literature identifies and deplores ). In this world without inertia, 
without an immanent principle of continuity, those at the 
bottom are like the creatures in a Cartesian universe: they hang 
on the arbitrary decision of a power responsible for the 
'continued creation' of their existence - as is shown and 
confirmed by the threat of plant closure, disinvestment and 
relocation. 
The particular character of the profound sense of insecurity 
and uncertainty about themselves and their future which 
affects all workers exposed to casualization stems from the fact 
that the principle of the division between those who are thrown 
back into the reserve army and those who are kept in work lies 
in academi cally guaranteed competence, which is also the basis of 
the division, within the 'technically advanced' company, 
between the executives or 'technicians' and the production-line 
workers, the new pariahs of industrial society. The generaliza­
tion of electronics, IT and quality standards, which requires all 
wage-earners to retrain and perpetuates the equivalent of school 
tests within the enterprise, tends to reinforce the sense of 
insecurity with a sense of unworthiness, deliberately fostered by 
the hierarchy. The occupational world, and by extension the 
whole social world, seems based on a ranking by 'competence', 
or, worse, of 'intelligen ce'. More, perhaps, than technical 
manipulations of working relations and the strategies especially 
designed to obtain the submission and obedience which are the 
focus of constant attention and permanent reinvention, more 
than the enormous investment in staff, time, research and work 
that is presupposed by the constant reinvention of new forms of 
'human resource' management, it is the belief in the hierarchy 
of academically guaran teed competences which underlies order 100 Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 
and discipline in private companies and also, increasingly, in the 
public sector. Manual workers -condemned to job insecurity 
and threatened with relegation into the indignity of unemploy­
ment, forced to define themselves in relation to the great 
nobility from the top-rank schools, destined for the command 
posts, and to the lesser nobility of clerks and technicians, who 
are assigned to tasks of implementation and always on suffer­
ance because they are permane ntly required to prove themselves 
-can only form a disenchanted image both of themselves and 
of their group. Once an object of pride, rooted in traditions and 
sustained by a whole technical and political heritage, manual 
workers as a group -if indeed it still exists as such -are thrown 
into demoralization, devaluation and political disillusionment, 
which is expressed in the crisis of activism or, worse, in a 
desperate rallying to the themes of quasi-fascist extremism. 
It can be seen how the neo-liberal utopia tends to be 
embodied in the reality of a kind of infernal machine, its 
necessity felt even by the dominant themselves -sometimes 
troubled, like George Soros, or the occasional pension fund 
manager, by anxiety at the destructive effects of the power they 
wield and led into compensatory actions inspired by the very 
logic that they want to neutralize, as with the benefactions of 
a Bill Gates. Like Marxism in earlier times, with which, in this 
respect, it has many common features, this utopia generates a 
potent belief, 'free trade faith', not only among those who live 
from it materially such as financiers, big businessmen, etc., but 
also those who derive from it their justifications for existing, 
such as the senior civil servants and politicians who deify the 
power of the markets in the name of economic efficiency, who 
demand the lifting of the administrative or political barriers 
that could hinder the owners of capital in their purely individual 
pursuit of maximum individual profit instituted as a model of Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 101 
rationality, who want independent central banks, who preach 
the subordination of the national states to the demands of 
economic freedom for the masters of the economy, with the 
suppression of all regulations on all markets, starting with the 
labour market, the forbidding of deficits and inflation, general­
ized privatization of public services, and the reduction of public 
and welfare spending. 
Without necessarily sharing the economic and social interests 
of the true believers, economists have sufficient specific interests 
in the field of economic science to make a decisive contribution, 
whatever their emotional responses to the economic and social 
effects of the utopia that they dress up in mathematical reason, 
to the production and reproduction of the neo-liberal utopia. Cut 
off by their whole existence and above all by their generally 
purely abstract and theoretical intellectual training from the real 
economic and social world, they are, like others in other times in 
the field of philosophy, particularly inclined to take the things 
oflogic for the logic of things. Trusting in models that they have 
practically never had the occasion to subject to experimental 
verification, tending to look down from on high on the conclu­
sions of the other historical sciences, in which they recognize only 
the purity and crystalline transparency of their mathematical 
games and whose real necessity and deep complexity they are 
most often unable to comprehend, they participate and collabor­
ate in an enormous economic and social transformation which, 
even if some of its consequences horrify them (they may 
subscribe to the Socialist Party and give considered advice to its 
representatives in the highest decision- making bodies), cannot 
entirely displease them, since, with a few 'blips', mainly attrib­
utable to what they call 'speculative fevers', it tends to give 
reality to the ultra-consistent utopia (like some forms oflunacy) 
to which they devote their lives. 102 Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 
And yet, the world is there, with the immediately visible 
effects of the implementation of the great neo-liberal utopia: not 
only the poverty and suffering of a growing proportion of the 
population of the economically most advanced societies, the 
extraordinary growth in disparities in incomes, the progressive 
disappearance of the autonomous worlds of cultural production, 
cinema, publishing, etc., and therefore, ultimately, of cultural 
products themselves, because of the growing intrusion of 
commercial considerations, but also and above all the destruc­
tion of all the collective institutions capable of standing up to 
the effects of the infernal machine -in the forefront of which 
is the state, the repository of all the universal ideas associated 
with the idea of the public -and the imposition, everywhere, at 
the highest levels of the economy and the state, or in corpora­
tions, of that kind of moral Darwinism which, with the cult of 
the 'winner', establishes the struggle of all against all and 
cynicism as the norm of all practices. And the new moral order, 
based on the reversal of all sets of values, is displayed in the 
spectacle, calmly diffused in the media, of all those high 
representatives of the state who abase the dignity of their 
position by bowing before the bosses of multinationals, Daewoo 
or Toyota, or competing to charm Bill Gates with their smiles 
and gestures of complicity. 
Is it reasonable to expect that the extraordinary mass of 
suffering produced by such a political and economic regime 
could one day give rise to a movement capable of stopping the 
rush into the abyss? In fact, we see here an extraordinary 
paradox: on the one hand, the obstacles encountered on the 
route to the new order, that of the individual who is solitary, 
but free, are now seen as attributable to rigidities or archaisms, 
and any direct or conscious intervention, at least when it comes 
from the state, through whatever channel, is discredited in Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 103 
advance on the grounds that it is inspired by civil servants 
pursuing their own interests and oblivious to the interests of the 
economic agents and it is therefore suggested that that interven­
tion be withdrawn in favour of a pure, anonymous mechanism, 
the market (which people forget is also the realm of the exercise 
of interests); yet on the other hand, it is in reality the 
permanence or the survival of institutions and agents of the old 
order now being dismantled, and all the work of the different 
kinds of 'social workers', and also all social, familial and other 
solidarities, which prevent the social order from collapsing into 
chaos in spite ofthe growing volume of the population cast into 
insecurity. The transition to 'liberalism' takes place impercep­
tibly, like continental drift, concealing its most terrible long­
term effects. These effects are thus masked, paradoxically, by 
the resistances it arouses, even now, from those who defend the 
old order by drawing on the resources stored up in it, in the legal 
or practical models of assistance and solidarity that it offered, 
in the habitus it favoured (among nurses, social workers, etc.), 
in short, in the reserves of social capital which protect a whole 
block of the present social order from falling into anomie (a 
capital which, if it is not renewed, reproduced, will inevitably 
run out, but which is still far from exhaustion). 
But these same forces of 'conservation', which it is too facile 
to treat as conservative forces, are also, in another respect, 
forces of resistance to the establishment of the new order, which 
can become subversive forces -so long as we know how to 
conduct the symbolic struggle against the incessant work of the 
neo-liberal 'thinkers' aimed at discrediting and disqualifying 
the heritage of words, traditions and representations associated 
with the historical conquests of the social movements of the past 
and the present; on condition, too, that we know how to defend 
the corresponding institutions, labour law, social welfare, social 104 Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 
security, etc., against the endeavour to consign them to the 
archaism of an outmoded past or, worse, to redefine them 
perversely as unnecess ary and unacceptable privileges. This is 
not an easy battle and it is not uncommon to have to fight it 
in the opposite terms. Inspired by a paradoxical intention of 
subversion oriented towards conservation or restoration, the revo­
lutionary conservatives find it easy to define as reactionary 
resistances the defensive reactions provoked by the conserva­
tive actions they describe as revolutionary; and to condemn as 
the archaic and retrograde defence of 'privileges' demands and 
revolts that appeal to established rights, in other words to a past 
threatened with deterioration or destruction by their regressive 
measures -the clearest example being the sacking of trade union 
representatives or, more radically, of the oldest workers, the 
trustees of the traditions of the group. 
And so if one can retain some reasonable hope, it is that, in 
state institutions and also in the dispositions of agents (espe­
cially those most attached to these institutions, like the minor 
state nobility), there still exist forces which, under the appear­
ance of simply defending a vanishing order and the correspond­
ing 'privileges' (which is what they will be accused of), will in 
fact, to withstand the pressure, have to work to invent and 
construct a social order which is not governed solely by the 
pursuit of selfish interest and individual profit, and which 
makes room for collectives oriented towards rational pursuit of 
collectively defined and approved ends. Among these collectives ­
associations, unions and parties - a special place should surely 
be made for the state, national or, better still, supranational, in 
other words a European state (as a stage on the way to a world 
state), capable of effectively controlling and taxing the profits 
made on the financial markets; capable also, and above all, of 
countering the destructive action which these markets exert on Neo-liberalism, Utopia of Unlimited Exploitation 105 
the labour market, by organizing, with the aid of the unions, the 
definition and defence of the public interest -which, whether one 
likes it or not, will never, even by juggling the figures, be 
produced by the accountant's view of the world (once one would 
have said 'grocer's') which the new belief presents as the 
supreme form of human achievement. 
Paris, Januar y 1998 
Notes 
1 August Walras (1800-66), French economist, was one of the 
first to attempt to apply mathematics to the study of 
economics (trans.). 
2 E. Goffman, Asylums. 
3 On all these matters, see the two issues of Actes de la Recherche 
en Sciences Sociales devoted to 'The new forms of domination 
at work' (114, Sept. 1996, and 115, Dec. 1996), and especially 
the introduction by Gabrielle Balazs and Michel Pialoux, 
'Crise du travail et crise du politique' (114, pp. 3-4). 
4 Dejours, Souffrance en France. Ref erences 
The list includes cited references and related works. 
Accardo, A. et aI., Journalistes au quotidien: outils pour une 
socioanalyse des pratiques journalistiques , Bordeaux: Le 
Mascaret, 1995. 
Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales , 'L'economie de la 
maison', 81-2, Mar. 1990. 
--'La souffrance', 90, Dec. 1991. 
--'Les nouvelles formes de domination au travail', 114, Sept. 
1996, and 115, Dec. 1996. 
--'Histoire de I'Etat', 116-17, Mar. 1997. 
--'Les ruses de la raison imperialiste', 121-2, Mar. 1998. 
Bloch, E., L'Esprit de l'utopie, Paris: Gallimard, 1977. 
Boschetti, A., Sartre et Les Temps Modernes: une entreprise 
intellectuelle, Paris: Minuit, 1976. 
Bourdieu, P., Travail et travailleurs en Algerie, Paris and The 
Hague: Mouton, 1963 (with A. Darbel, J. P. Rivet and C. 
Seibel). 
-- Algeria 1960, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1979. 
--'De ux imperialismes de l'universel', in C. Faure and T. References 107 
Bishop (eds), L'Ameriqu edes Frant;ais, Paris: Editions Franyois 
Bourin, 1992. 
--'The racism of intelligence', in Sociolo gy in Question, 
London: Sage, 1993. 
-- The State Nobilit y: Elite Schools in the Field of Power, 
Cambridge: Polity Press, 1996. 
-- Medit ations pascaliennes, Paris: Seuil, 1997. 
Bourdieu, P. et al., La Misere du monde, Paris: Seuil, 1993. 
Champagne, P., Faire l'opinion, Paris: Minuit, 1993. 
--'Le journalisme entre precarite et concurrence', Liber, 29, 
Dec. 1996. 
Charle, c., Naissance des intellectuels, Paris: Minuit, 1990. 
Dejours, C., Souff rance en France: la banalisation de l'injustice 
sociale, Paris: Seuil, 1997. 
Dezalay, Y. and B. B. Garth, Dealin g in Virtue, Chicago: 
Chicago University Press, 1995. 
Dezalay, Y. and D. Sugarman, Professional Competition Power: 
Lawyers, Accountants and the Social Construction of Markets, 
London and New York: Routledge, 1995. 
Dixon, K., 'Les Evangelistes du Marche', Liber, 32, Sept. 1997, 
pp.5-6. 
Fallows, J., Breakin g the News: How Media Undermine Ameri­
can Democ racy, New York: Vintage Books, 1997. 
Ferry, L. and A. Renaut, La Pensee 68, Paris: Gallimard, 1985. 
Goffman, E., Asylums: Essa ys on the Social Situation of Mental 
Patients and Other Inmates, Harmondsworth : Penguin, 1961. 
Gremion, P., Preuves, une revue europeenne a Paris, Paris: 
Julliard, 1989. 
-- Intelligence de l'anti-communisme: Ie congres pour la liberte 
de la culture a Paris, Paris: Fayard, 1995. 
Halimi, S., Les Nouveaux Chiens de garde, Paris: Liber-Raisons 
d'Agir, 1997. 108 References 
Liber, 'Mouvements divers: Ie choix de Ia subversi on', 33, Dec. 
1997. 
Pasche, C. and S. Peters, 'Les premiers pas de Ia Societe du 
Mont-PeIerin ou les dessous chics du neoliberalis me', Les 
Annuelles (L'avenement des sciences sociaies comme disci­
plines academiques), 8, 1997, pp. 191-216. 
Salesse, Y., Propositi ons pour une autre Europe: construire Babel, 
Paris: FeIin, 1997. 
Theret, B., L 'Etat, la finance et le social, Paris: La Decouverte, 
1995. 
Vidal-Naquet, P., Les Juif s, La memoire et le present, Paris: La 
Decouverte, vol. 1 1981, vol. 2 1991. 
Wacquant, L., 'De PEtat charitable it PEtat penal: notes sur Ie 
traitement politique de la misere en Amerique', Regards 
Sociolo giques, 11, 1996. ISBN 0-7456-2218-6 
90000> 
9 780745 62218 7 