CULTURE 
AND 
IMPERIALISM 
Edward W. Said 
VINTAGE BOOKS 
A Division of Random House, Inc. 
New York FffiSTVINTAGE BOOKS EDillON,JUNE 1994 
Portions of this work, in different versions, have appeared in Field Dty Pamphlets, 
Grand Street, the Gtumlitm, Lond011 Reuiew ofBoolts, Nr.o Left Rer;iew, Rttrittm, the 
Penguin edition of Kim, Rme tmd Class, and ~"lid Wdliams: CritiuJ Persp«tivtt, 
edited by Terry Eagleton. 
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc. and Faber and 
Faber Ltd., for permission to reprint "Tradition and the Individual nlent" from 
Sektted &><ys by T. S. Eliot, copyright 1950 by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 
and tenewed 1978 by Esme Valerie Eliot. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Said, Edward W. 
Culture and imperialism/Edward W. Said-1st Vintage Booka ed. 
P· em. 
Originallypubliohed: New York: Knopf, 1993. 
Includes bibliogr•phical rcti.rences and index. 
ISBN 0-679-75054-1 
I. European literature -Hiotory and criticism- Theory, etc. 
2. Uterarore- Hiororyand criticism- Theory, etc. 3. Imperialism in literature. 
4. Colonies in literature. 5. Politics and culture. 
I. Tide. 
[PN761.S28 1994] 
809' .894-dc20 
CIP 93-43485 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 I For 
Eqbal Ahmad The conquest of the eanh, which mostly means the taking it away 
from those who have a different complexion or slightly flaner noses 
than ourselves, is not a preny thing when you look into it roo much. 
What redeems it is the idea only. An idea at the back of it; not a 
sentimental pretence but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the 
idea--something you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a 
sacrifice to .... 
JosEPH CoNRAD, Heart of.Darlmess Contents 
Introduction xi 
CHAPTER ONE 
OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES, 
INTERTWINED HISTORIES 
Empire, Geography, and Culture 3 
II Images of the Past, Pure and Impure IJ 
Ill Two Visions in Hem of Darkne.t 19 
IV Discrepant Experiences 3' 
v Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 43 
CHAPTER TWO 
CONSOLIDATED VISION 
Narrative and Social Space 61 
II Jane Austen and Empire 8o 
Ill The Cultural Integrity of Empire 97 
IV The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida Ill 
v The Pleasures of Imperialism 131 
VI The Native Under Control 161 
VII Camus and the French Imperial Experience 169 
VIII A Note on Modernism J86 X 
II 
III 
IV 
v 
II 
III Contents 
CHAPTER THREE 
RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
There Are Two Sides 
Themes of Resistance Culture 
Yeats and Decolonizarion 
The Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 
Collaboration, Independence, and Liberation 
CHAPTER FOUR 
FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 
Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
Movements and Migrations 
Notes 
Index 191 
209 
220 
239 
262 
z82 
3°3 
]26 Introduction 
A bout five years after Orienta/ism was published in 1978, I began to gather 
together some ideas about the general relationship between culture 
and empire that had become clear to me while writing that book. The first 
·result was a series oflectures that I gave at universities in the United States, 
Canada, and England in·1985 and 1986. These lectures form the core argu­
ment of the present work, which has occupied me steadily since that time. 
A substantial amount of scholarship in anthropology, history, and area 
studies has developed arguments I put forward in OrieniiiJiJm, which was 
limited to the Middle East. So I, too, have tried here to expand the argu­
ments of the. earlier book to describe a more general pattern of relationships 
between the modern metropolitan West and its overseas territories. 
What are .some of the non-Middle Eastern materials drawn on here? 
European writing on Africa, India, parts of the Far East, Australia, and the 
Caribbean; these Africanist and Indianist discourses, as some of them have 
been called, I see as part of the general European effort to rule distant lands 
and peoples and, therefore, as related to Orientalist descriptions of the 
Islamic world, as well as to Europe's special ways of representing the 
Caribbean islands, Ireland, and the Far East What are striking in these 
discourses are the rhetorical figures one keeps encountering in their descrip­
tions of"the mysterious East," as well as the stereotypes about "the African 
[or Indian or Irish or Jamaican or Chinese] mind;" the notions about bring­
ing civilization to primitive or barbari~ peoples, the disturbingly familiar 
ideas about flogging or death or extended punishment being required when 
"they" misbehaved or became rebellious, because "they" mainly understood 
force· or violerice best; "they" were. not like "us," and for that reason de• 
served to be ruled. xii Introduction 
Yet it was the case nearly everywhere in the non-European world that the 
coming of the wl-iite man brought forth some sort of resistance. What I left 
out of Orimtalirm was that response to Western dominance which cul­
minated in the great movement of decolonization all across' the Third 
World. Along with armed resistance in places as diverse as nineteenth­
century Algeria, Ireland, and Indonesia, there also went considerable efforts 
in cultural resistance almost everywhere, the assertions of nationalist identi­
ties, and, in the political realm, the creation of associations and parties whose­
common goal was self-determination and national independence. Never was 
it the case that the imperial encounter pitted an active Western intruder 
against a supine or inert non-Western native; there was ai'Wayr some form of 
active resistance, and in the overwhelming majority of cases, the resistance 
finally won out. 
These two factors-a general world-wide pattern of imperial culture, and 
a historical experience of resistance against empire--inform this book in 
ways that make it not just a sequel to Orimtalirm but an attempt to do 
something else. In both books I have emphasized what in a rather general 
way I have called "culture." As I use the word, "culture" means two things 
in particular. First of all it means all those practices, like the arts of descrip­
tion, communication, and representation, that have relative autonomy from 
the economic, social, and political realms and that often exist in aesthetic 
forms, one of whose principal aims is pleasure. Included, of course, are both 
the popular stock of lore about distant parts of the world and specialized 
knowledge available in such learned disciplines as ethnography, historiogra­
phy, philology, sociology, and literary history. Since my exclusive focus here 
~s on the modem Western empires of the nineteenth and twentieth centu­
ries, I have looked especially at cultural forms like the novel, which I believe 
were immensely important in the formation ofimperial attitudes, references, 
and experiences. I do not mean that only the novel was important, but that 
I consider it the aesthetic object whose connection to the expanding societies 
of Britain and France is particularly interesting to study. The prototypical 
inodern realistic novel is Robinson Cru.roe, and certainly not accidentally it is 
about a European who creates a fiefdom for himself on a distant, non­
European island. 
A great deal of recent criticism has concentrated on narrative fiction, yet 
very little attention has been paid to· its position in the history and world of 
empire. Readers of this book will quickly discover that narrative is crucial 
to my argument here, my basic point being that stories are at the heart of 
what explorers and novelists say about strange regions of the world; they 
also become the method colonized people use to assert their own identity 
and the existence of their own history. The main battle in imperialism is Introduction Xlll 
•over land, of course; but when it came to who owned the land, who had the 
right to settle and work on it, who kept it going, who won it back, and who 
now plans its future--these issues were reflected, contested, and even for a 
time decided in narrative. As one critic has suggested, nations themselves 
are narrations. The power to narrate, or to block other narratives from 
forming and emerging, is very important to culture and imperialism, and 
constitutes one of the main connections between them. Most important, the 
grand narratives of emancipation and enlightenment mobilized people in the 
colonial world to rise up and throw off imperial subjection; in the process, 
many Europeans and Americans were also stirred by these stories and their 
protagonists, and they too fought for new narratives of equality and human 
community. 
Second, and almost imperceptibly, culture is a concept that includes a 
refining and elevating element, each society's reservoir of the best that has 
been known and thought, as Matthew Arnold put it in the 186os. Arnold 
believed that culture palliates, if it does not altogether neutralize, the rav­
ages of a modern, aggressive, mercantile, and brutalizing urban existence. 
You read Dante or Shakespeare in order to keep up with the best that was 
thought and known, and also to see yourself, your people, society, and 
tradition in their best lights. In time, culture comes to be associated, often 
aggressively, with the nation or the state; this differentiates ·"us" from 
"them," almost always with some degree of xenophobia. Culture in this 
sense is a source of identity, and a rather combative one at that, as we see 
in recent "returns" to culture and tradition. These "returns" accompany 
rigorous codes of intellectual and moral behavior that are opposed to the 
permissiveness associated with such relatively liberal philosophies as mul­
ticulturalism and hybridity. ~~~ the formhly colonized world, these "returns" 
have produced varieties of religious and nationalist fundamentalism. 
In this second sense culture is a sort of theater where various political and 
ideological causes engage one another. Far from being a placid realm of 
Apollonian gentility, culture can even be a battleground on which causes 
expose themselves to the light of day and contend with one another, making 
it apparent that, for instance, American, French, or Indian students who are 
taught to read their national classics before they read others are expected to 
appreciate and belong ioyally, often uncritically, to their nations and tradi­
tions while denigrating or fighting against others. 
Now the trouble with this idea of culture is that it entails not only 
venerating one's own culture but also thinking of it as somehow divorced 
from, because transcending, the everyday world. Most professional human­
ists as a result are unable to make the connection between the prolonged and 
sordid cruelty of practices s-qch as slavery, colonialist and racial oppression, xiv Introduction 
and imperial subjection on the one hand, and the poetry, fiction, philosophy 
of the society that engages in these practices on the other. One of the difficult 
truths I discovered in working on this book is how very few of the British 
or French artists whom I admir~ took issue with the notion of "subject" or 
"inferior" races so prevalent among officials who practiced those ideas as a 
matter of course in ruling India or Algeria. They were widely accepted 
notions; and they helped fuel the imperial acquisition of territories in Africa 
throughout the nineteenth century. In thinking of Carlyle or Ruskin, or even 
of Dickens and Thackeray, critics have often, I believe, relegated these 
writers' ideas about colonial expansion, inferior races, or "niggers" to a very 
different department from that of culture, culture being the elevated area of 
activity in which they "truly" belong and in which they did their ''really" 
important work. 
Culture conceived in this way can become a protective enclosure: check 
your politics at the door before you enter it. As someone who has spent his 
entire professional life teaching literature, yet who also grew up in the 
, pre-World War Two colonial world, I have found it a challenge not to see 
culture in this way-that is, antiseptically quarantined from its worldly 
affiliations--but as an extraordinarily varied field of endeavor. The novels 
and other books I consider here I analyze because first of all I find them 
estimable and admirable works of art and learning, in which l and many 
other readers take pleasure and from which we derive profit. Second, the 
challenge is to connect them not only with that pleasure and profit but also 
with the imperial process of which they were manifestly and unconcealedly 
a pan; rather than condemning or ignoring their participation in what was 
an unquestioned reality in their societies, I suggest that what we learn about 
this hitherto ignored aspect actually and truly enhances our reading and 
understanding of them. 
Let me say a little here about what I have in mind, using two well-known 
and very great novels. Dickens's Great Expectlltions (1861) is primarily a novel 
about self-delusion, about Pip's vain attempts to become a gentleman with 
neither the hard work nor the aristocratic source of income required for such 
a role. Early in life he helps a condemned convict, Abel Magwitch, who, after 
being transported to Australia, pays back his young benefactor with large 
sums of money; because the lawyer involved says nothing as he disburses the 
money, Pip persuades himself that an elderly gentlewoman, Miss Havisham, 
h·as been his patron. Magwitch then reappears illegally in London, unwel­
comed by Pip because every.thing about the man reeks of delinquency and 
unpleasantness. In the end, though, Pip is reconciled to Magwitch and to his 
reality: he finally acknowledges Magwitch-hun~ed, apprehended, and fa­
tally ill-as his surrogate father, not as someone to be denied or rejected, Introduction XV 
though Magwitch is in fact unacceptable, being from Australia, a penal 
colony designed for the rehabilitation·but not the repatriation of transported 
English criminals. 
Most, if not all, readings of this remarkable wor~ situate it squarely within 
the metropolitan history of British fiction, whereas I believe that it belongs 
in a history both more inclusive and more dynamic than such interpretations 
allow. It has been left to two more recent books than Dickens's--Robert 
Hughes's magisterial The Fatal Shrwe and Paul Carter's brilliantly speculative 
The Road to Botany Bay-to reveal a vast history of speculation about and 
experience of Australia, a "white" colony like Ireland, in which we can 
locate Magwitch and Dickens not as mere coincidental references in that 
history, but as participants in it, through the novel and through a much older 
and wider experience between England and its overseas territories. 
Australia was established as a penal colony in the late eighteenth century 
mainly so that England could transport an irredeemable, unwanted excess 
population of felons to a place, originally charted by Captain Cook, that 
would also function as a colony replacing those lost in America. The pursuit 
of profit, the building of empire, and what Hughes calls social apartheid 
together produced modern Australia, which by the time Dickens first took 
an interest in it during the 184os (in David Copperfield Wilkins Micawber 
happily immigrates there) had progressed somewhat into profitability and a 
sort of "free system" where laborers could do well on their own if allowed 
to do so. Yet in Magwitch 
Dickens ·knotted several strands in the English perception of convicts 
in Australia at the end of transportation. They could succeed, but they 
could hardly, in the real sense, return. They could expiate their crimes 
in a technical, legal sense, but what they suffered there warped them 
into pertnanent outsiders. And yet they were capable of redemption­
as long as they stayed in Australia. 1 
Carter's exploration of what he calls Australia's spatial history offers us 
another version of that same experience. Here explorers, convicts, ethnogra­
phers, profiteers, soldiers chart the vast and relatively empty continent each 
in a discourse that jostles, displaces, or incorporates the others. Botany Bay 
is therefore first of all an Enlightenment discourse of travel and discovery, 
then a set of travelling narrators (including Cook) whose words, charts, and 
intentions accumulate the strange territories and gradually turn them into 
"home." The adjacence between the Benthamite organization of space 
(which produced the city of Melbourne) and 'the apparent disorder of the 
Australian bush is shown by Carter to have become an optimistic transfor-:xvi Introtluction 
marion of social space, which produced an Elysium for gendemen, an Eden 
for laborers in the 184os.z What Dickens envisions for Pip, being Magwitch's 
"London gentleman," is roughly equivalent to what was envisioned by 
English benevolence for Australia, one social space authorizing another. 
But Great Expectlltion.r was not written with anything like the concern for 
native Australian accounts that Hughes or Carter has, nor did it presume or 
forecast a tradition of Australian writing, which in fact came later to includ~ 
the literary works of David Malouf, Peter Carey, ,and Patrick White. The 
prohibition placed on Magwitch's rerum is not only penal but imperial: 
subjects can be taken to places like Australia, but they cannot be allowed a 
"return" to metropolitan space, which, as all Dickens's fiction testifies, is 
meticulously charted, spoken for, inhabited by a hierarchy of metropolitan 
personages. So on the one hand, interpreters like Hughes and Carter expand 
on the relatively attenuated presence of Australia in nineteenth-century 
British writing, expressing the fullness and earned integrity of an Australian 
history that became independent from Britain's in the twentieth century; 
yet, on the other, an ·accurate reading of Great Exper:mtion.r must note that 
after Magwitch's delinquency is expiated, so to speak, after Pip redemp­
tively acknowledges his debt to the old, bitterly energized, and vengeful 
convict, Pip himself collapses and is revived in two explicitly positive ways. 
A new Pip appears, less laden than the old Pip with the chains of the 
past-he is glimpsed in the form of a child, also called Pip; and the old Pip 
takes on a new career with his boyhood friend Herbert Pocket, this time not 
as an idle gentleman but as a hardworking trader in the East, where Britain's 
other colonies offer a sort of normality that Australia never could. 
Thus even as Dickens settles the difficulty with Australia, another struc­
ture of attitude and reference emerges to suggest Britain's imperial inter­
course through trade and travel with the Orient. In his new career as colonial 
businessman, Pip is hardly an exceptional figure, since nearly aU of Dickens's 
businessmen, wayward relatives, and frightening outsiders have a fairly 
normal and secure connection with the empire. But it is only in recent years 
that these connections have taken on interpretative importance. A new 
generation of scholars and critics-the children of decolonization in some 
instances, the beneficiaries (like sexual, religious, and racial minorities) of 
advances in human freedom at home-have seen in such great texts of 
Western literature a standing interest in what was considered a lesser world, 
populated with lesser people of color, portrayed as open to the intervention 
of so many Robinson Crusoes. 
By the end of the nineteenth century the empire is no longer merely a 
shadowy presence, or embodied merely in the unwelcome appearance of a 
fugitive convict but, in the works of writers like Conrad, Kipling, Gide, and Introduction xvii 
, Loti, a central area of concern. Conrad's !Vostromo (1904)--my second exam­
ple-is set in a Central American republic, independent (unlike the African 
and East Asian colonial settings of his earlier fictions), and dominated at the 
same time by outside interests because of its immense silver mine. For a 
contemporary American the most compelling aspect of the work is Conrad's 
prescience: he forecasts the,unstoppable unrest and "misrule" of the Latin 
American republics (governing them, he says, quoting Bolivar, is like plow­
ing the sea), and he singles out North America's particular way ofinfluenc­
ing conditions in a decisive yet barely visible way. Holroyd, the San 
Francisco financier who backs Charles Gould, the British owner of the San 
Tome mine, warns his protege that "we won't be drawn into any large 
trouble" as investors. Nevertheless, 
We can sit and watch. Of course, some day we shall step in. We are 
bound to. But there's no hurry. Time itself has got to wait on the 
greatest country in the whole of God's universe. We shall be giving the. 
word for everything--industry, trade, law, journalism, art, politics, and 
religion, from Cape Hom clear over to Surith's Sound, and beyond it, 
too, if anything worth taking hold of turns up at the North Pole. And 
then we shall have the leisure to take in hand the outlying islands and 
continents of the earth. We shall run the world's business whether the 
world likes it or not. The world can't help it-and neither can we, I 
guess.3 
Much of the rhetoric of the "New World Order'' promulgated by the 
American government since the end of the Cold War-with its redolent 
self-congratulation, its unconcealed triumphalism, its grave proclamations.of 
responsibility-might have been scripted by Conrad's Holroyd: we are 
number one, we are bound to lead, we stand for freedom and order, and so 
on. No American has been immune from this structure of feeling, and yet 
the implicit warning contained in Conrad's portraits of Holroyd and Gould 
is rarely reil~ted on sinct: the rhetoric of power all too easily produces an 
illusion of benevolence when deployed in an imperial setting. Yet it is a 
rhetoric whose most damning characteristic is that it has been used before, 
not just once (by Spain and Portugal) but with deafeningly repetitive fre­
quency in the modern period; by the British, the French, the Belgians, the 
Japanese, the Russians, and now the Americans. 
Yet it would be incomplete to read Conrad's great work simply as an early 
prediction of what we see happening in twentieth-century Latin America, 
with its string of United Fruit Companies, colonels, liberation forces, and 
American-financed mercenaries. Conrad is the precursor of the Western xviii Introduction 
views of the Third World which one finds in the work of novelists as 
different as Graham Greene, V. S. Naipaul, and Robert Stone, of theoreti­
Cians of imperialism like Hannah Arendt, and of travel writers, filmmakers, 
and polemicists whose specialty is to deliver the non-European world either 
for analysis and judgement or for satisfying the exotic tastes of European and 
North American audiences. For if it is true that Conrad ironically sees the 
imperialism of the San Tome silver mine's British and American owners as 
·doomed by its own pretentious and impossible ambitions, it is also true that 
he writes as a man whose Western view of the non-Western world is so 
ingrained as to blind him to other histories, other cultures, other aspirations. 
All Conrad can see is a world totally dominated by the Atlantic West, in 
which every opposition to the West only confirms the West's wicked power. 
What Conrad cannot see is an alternative to this cruel tautology. He could 
neither understand that India, Africa, and South America also had lives and 
cultures with integrities not totally controlled by the gringo imperialists and 
reformers of this·· world, nor allow himself to believe that anti-imperialist 
independence movements were not all corrupt and in the pay of the puppet 
masters in London or Washington. 
These crucial limitations in vision are as much a part of Nostromo as its 
characters and plot. Conrad's novel embodies the same paternalistic arro­
gance of imperialism that it mocks in characters like Gould and Holroyd. 
Conrad seems to be saying, "We Westerners will decide who is a good 
native or a bad, because all natives. have sufficient existence by virtue of our 
recognition. We created them, we taught them to speak and think, and when 
they rebel they simply confirm our views of them as silly children, duped 
by some of their Western masters." This is in effect' what Americans have 
felt about their southern neighbors: that independence is to be wished for 
them so long as it is the kind of independence we approve o£ Anything else 
'is unacceptable and, worse, unthinkable. 
It is no paradox, therefore, that Conrad was both anti-imperialist and 
imperialist, progressive when it came to rendering fearlessly and pessimisti­
cally the self-confirming, self-deluding corruption of overseas domination, 
deeply reactionary when it came to conceding that Africa or South America 
could ever have had an independent history or culture, which the imperial­
ists violently· disturbed but by which they were ultimately defeated. Yet lest 
we think patronizingly of Conrad as the creature of his own time, we had 
better note that recent attitudes in Washington and.among most Western 
policymakers and intellectuals show little advance over his views. What 
Conrad discerned as the futility latent in imperialist philanthropy-whose 
intentions include such ideas as "making the world safe for democracy''­
the United States government is still unable to perceive, as it tries to Introduction XIX 
,implement its wishes all OVC!i the globe, especially in the Middle East. At 
least Conrad had the courage to see th~t no such schemes· ever succeed­
because they trap. the planners in more illusions of omnipotence and mis­
leading self-satisfaction (as in Vietnam), and because by their very nature 
they falsify the evidence. 
All this is worth bearing in mind if Nostromo is to be read with some 
attention to its massive strengths and inherent limitations. The newly inde­
pendent state of Sulaco that emerges at the end of the novel is only a smaller, 
more tightly controlled and intolerant version of the larger state from which 
it has seceded and has now come to displace in wealth and importance. 
Conrad allows the reader to see that imperialism is a system. Life in one 
subordinate realm of experience is imprinted by the fictions and follies of the 
dominant realm. But the reverse is true, too, as experience in the dominant 
society comes to depend uncritically on natives and their territories per­
ceived as in need of Ia mission civiJisatn'ce. 
However it is read, Nostromo offers a profoundly unforgiving view, and it 
has quite literally enabled the equally severe view of Western imperialist 
illusions in Graham Greene's The Qgiet American or V. S. Naipaul's A Bend 
in the. River, novels with very different agendas. Few readers today, after 
Vietnam, Iran, the Philippines, Algeria, Cuba, Nicaragua, Iraq, would dis­
agree that it is precisely the fervent innocence of Greene's Pyle or N aipaul's 
Father H1.1ismans, men for whom the native can be educ•ted into "our" 
civilization, that turns out to produce the murder, subversion, and endless 
instability of"primitive" societies. A similar anger pervades films like Oliver 
Stone's Salvador, Francis Ford Coppola's Apocalypse Now, and Constantin 
Costa-Gavras's M.,issing, in which unscrupulous CIA operatives and power­
mad officers manipulate natives and well-intentioned Americans alike. 
Yet all these works, which are so indebted to Conrad's anti-imperialist 
irony in Nostromo; argue that the source of the world's significant action and 
life is in the .West, whose representatives seem at liberty to visit their 
fantasies and philanthropies upon a mind-deadened Third World. In this 
view, the outlying regions of the world have no life, history, or culture to 
speak of, no independence or integrity worth representing without the West. 
And when there is something to be described it is, following Conrad, unut,.. 
terably corrupt, degenerate, irredeemable. But whereas Conrad wrote Nos­
tromo during a period of Europe's largely uncontested imperialist 
enthusiasm, contemporary novelists and filmmakers who have learned his 
ironies so well have done their work after decolonization, after the massive 
intellectual, moral, and imaginative overhaul and deconstruction ofWestern 
representation of the non-Western world, after the work of Frantz Fanon, 
Amflcar Cabral, C.L.R. James, Walter Rodney, after the -novels and plays of XX Introduction 
Chinua Achebe, Ngugi wa Thiongo, Wole Soyinka, Salman Rushdie, Ga­
briel Garda Marquez, and many others. 
Thus Conrad has passed along his residual imperialist propensities, al­
though his heirs scarcely have an excuse to justify the often subtle and 
unreflecting bias of their work. This is not just a matter ofWesterners who 
do not have enough sympathy for or comprehension of foreign cultures-­
since there are, after all, some artists and intellectuals who have, in effect, 
crossed to the other side-Jean Genet, Basil Davidson, Alben Memmi,Juan 
Goytisolo, and others. What is perhaps more relevant is the political willing­
ness to take seriously the alternatives to imperialism, among them the 
existence of other cultures and societies. Whether one believes that Conrad's 
extraordinary fiction confirms habitual Western suspicions about Latin 
America, Africa, and Asia, or ·whether one sees in novels like Nostromo and 
Great Expeaation.r the lineaments of an astonishingly durable imperial world­
view, capable of warping the perspectives of reader and author equally: both 
those ways of reading the real alternatives seem outdated. The world today 
does not exist as a spectacle about which we can be either pessimistic or 
optimistic, about which our "texts" can be either ingenious or boring. All 
such attitudes involve the deployment of power and interests. To the extent 
that we see Conrad both criticizing and reproducing the imperial ideology 
of his time, to that extent we can characterize our own present attitudes: 
the projection, or the refusal, of the wish to dominate, the capacity to damn, 
or the energy to comprehend and engage with other societies, traditions, 
histories. 
The world has changed since Conrad and Dickens in ways that have 
surprised, and often alarmed, metropolitan Europeans and Americans, who 
now confront large non-white immigrant populations in their midst, and 
face an impressive roster of newly empowered voices asking for their narra­
tives to be heard. The point of my book is that such populations and voices 
have been there for some time, thanks to the globalized process set in motion 
by modern imperialism; to ignore or otherwise discount the overlapping 
experience of Westerners and Orientals, the interdependence of cultural 
tenains in which colonizer and colonized co-existed and battled each other 
through projections as well as rival geographies, narratives, and histories, is 
to miss what is essential about the world in the past century. 
For the first time, the history of imperialism and its culture can now be 
studied as neither monolithic nor reductively compartmentalized, separate, 
distinct True, there has been a disturbing eruption of separatist and chau­
vinist discourse, whether in India, Lebanon, or Yugoslavia, or in Afrocentric, 
Islamocentric, or Eurocentric proclamations; far from invalidating the strug­
gle to be free from empire, these reductions of cultural discourse actually Introduction xxi 
prove the validity of a fundamental liberationist energy that animates the 
wish w be independent, to speak freely and without the burden of unfair 
domination. The only way to understand this energy, however, is histori­
cally: and hence the rather wide geographical and historical range attempted 
in this book. In our wish to make ourselves heard, we tend very often to 
forget that the world is a cro'Yded place, and that if everyone were to insist 
on the radical purity or priority of one's own voice, all we would have would 
be the awful din of unending strife, and a bloody political mess, the true 
horror of which is beginning to ·be perceptible here and there in the re­
emergence of racist politics in Europe, the cacophony of debates ·over 
political correctness and identity politics in the United States, and-to speak 
about my own part of the world-the intolerance of religious prejudice and 
illusionary prolllises ofBismarckian despotism, a Ia Saddarn Hussein and his 
numerous Arab epigones and counterparts. 
What a sobering and inspiring thing it is therefore not just to read one's 
own side, as it were, but also to grasp how a great artist like Kipling (few 
more imperialist and reactionary than he) rendered India with such skill, and 
how in doing so his novel Kim not only depended on a long history of 
Anglo-Indian perspective, but also, in spite of itself, forecast the untenability 
of that perspective in its insistence on the belief that the Indian reality 
required, indeed beseeched British tutelage more or less indefinitely. The 
great cultural archive, I argue, is where the intellectual and aesthetic invest­
ments in overseas dominion are made. If you were British or French in the 
186os you saw, and you felt, India and North Africa with a combination of 
familiarity and distance, but never with a sense of their separate sovereignty. 
In your narratives, histories, travel tales, and explorations your conscious­
ness was represented as the principal authority, an active point of energy 
that made sense not just of colonizing activities but of exotic geographies and 
peoples. Above all, your sense of power scarcely imagined that those "na­
tives" who appeared either subservient or sullenly uncooperative were ever 
going to be capable of finally making you give up India or Algeria. Or of 
saying anything that might perhaps contradict, challenge, or otherwise dis­
rupt the prevailing discourse. 
Imperialism's culture was not invisible, nor did it conceal its worldly 
affiliations and interests. There is a sufficient clarity in the culture's major 
lines for us to remark the often scrupulous notations recorded there, and also 
to remark how they have not been.paid much attention. Why they are now 
of such interest as, for instance, to spur this and other books derives less 
from a kind of retrospective vindictiveness than from a fortified need for 
links and connections. One of imperialism's ·achievements was to bring the 
world closer together, and although in the process the separation between XXll Introduction 
Europeans and natives was an insidious and fundamentally unjust one, 
most of us should now regard the historical experience of empire as a com-
. mon one. The task then is to describe it as pertaining to Indians and 
Britishers, Algerians and French, Westerners and Africans, Asians, Latin 
Americans, and Australians despite the horrors, the bloodshed, and the 
vengeful bitterness. 
My method is to focus as much as possible on individual works, to read 
them first as great products of the creative or interpretative imagination, and 
then to show them as part of the relationship between culture and empire. 
I do not believe that authors are mechanically determined by ideology, class, 
or economic history, but authors are, I also believe, very much in the history 
of their societies, shaping and shaped by that history and their social experi­
ence in different measure. Culture and the aesthetic forms it contains derive 
from historical experience, which in effect is one of the main subjects of this 
book. As I discovered in writing Orienta/ism, you cannot grasp historical 
experience by lists or catalogues, and no matter how much you provide by 
way of coverage, some books, articles, authors, and ideas are going to be left 
out. Instead, I have tried to look at what I consider to be important and 
essential things, conceding in advance that selectivity and conscious choice 
have had to rule what I have done. My hope is that readers and critics of this 
book will use it to further the lines of inquiry and arguments about the 
historical experience of imperialism put forward in it. In discussing and 
analyzing what in fact is a global process, I have had to be occasionally both 
general and summary; yet no one, I am sure, would wish this book any 
longer than it is! 
Moreover, there are several empires that I do not discuss: the Austro-. 
Hungarian, the Russian, the Ottoman, and the Spanish and Portuguese. 
These omissions, however, are not at all meant to suggest that Russia's 
domination of Central Asia ·and Eastern Europe, Istanbul's rule over the 
Arab world, Portugal's over what are today's Angola and Mozambique, and 
Spain's domination in both the Pacific and Latin America have been either 
benign (and hence approved of) or any less imperialist. What I am saying 
about the British, French, and American imperial experience is that it has 
a unique coherence and a special cultural centrality. England of course is in 
an imperial class by itself, bigger, grander, more imposing than any other; 
for almost two centuries France was in direct competition with it. Since 
narrative plays such a remarkable part in the imperial. quest, it is therefore 
not surprising that France and (especially) England have an unbroken tradi­
tion of novel-writing, unparalleled elsewhere. America began as an empire 
during the nineteenth century, but it was in the second half of the twentieth, Introduction xxiii 
after the decolonization of the British and French empires, that it directly 
followed its two great predecessors. 
There are two additional reasons for focussing as I do on these three. One 
is that the idea of overseas rule--jumping beyond adjacent territories to very 
distant lands--has a privileged status in these three cultures. This idea has 
a lot to do with projections, whether in fiction or geography or art, and it 
acquires a continuous presence through actual expansion, administration, 
investment, and commitment. There is something systematic about imj,erial 
culture therefore that is not as evident in any other empire as it is in Britain's 
or France's and, in a different way, the United States'. When I use the phrase 
"a structure of attitude and reference," this is what I have in mind. Second 
is that these countries are the three in whose orbits I was born, grew up, and 
now live. Although I feel at home in them, I have remained, as a native from 
the Arab and Muslim world, someone who also belongs to the other side. 
This has enabled me in a sense to live on both sides, and to try to mediate 
between them. 
In fine, this is a book about the past and the present, about "us" and 
"them," as each of these things is seen by the various, and usually opposed 
and separated, parties. Its moment, so to speak, is that of the period after the 
Cold War, when the United States has emerged as the last superpower. To 
live there during such a time means, for an educator and intellectual with 
a background in the Arab world, a number of quite particular concerns, all 
. of which have inflected this book, as indeed they have influenced everything 
I have written since Orienta/ism. 
First is a depressing sense that one has seen and read about current 
American policy formulations before. Each great metropolitan center that 
aspired to global dominance has said, and alas done, many of the same things. 
There is always the appeal to power and national interest in running the 
affairs of lesser peoples; there is the same destructive zeal when the going 
gets a little rough, or when natives rise up and reject a compliant and 
unpopular ruler who was ensnared and kept in place by the imperial power; 
there is the horrifically predictable disclaimer that "we" are exceptional, not 
imperial, not about to repeat the mistake of earlier powers, a disclaimer that 
has been routinely followed by making the mistake, as witness the Vietnam 
and Gulf wars. Worse yet has been the amazing, if often passive, collabora­
tion with these practices on the part of intellectuals, artists, journalists whose 
positions at home are progressive and full of admirable sentiments, but the 
opposite whe11 it comes to what is done abroad in their name. 
It is· my (perhaps illusory) hope that a history of the imperial adventure 
rendered in cultural terms might therefore serve some illustrative and even XXIV Introduction 
deterrent purpose. Yet though imperialism implacably advanced during the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, resistance to it also advanced. Methodo­
logically then I try to show the two forces together. This by no means 
exempts the aggrieved colonized peoples from criticism; as any survey of 
post-colonial states will reveal, the fonunes and misfonunes of nationalism, 
of what can be called separatism and nativism, do not always make up a 
flattering story. It too must be told, if only to show that there have always 
been alternatives to Idi Amin and Saddam Hussein. Western imperialism 
and Third World nationalism feed ·off each other, but even at their worst 
they are neither monolithic nor deterministic. Besides, culture is not mono­
lithic either, and is not the exclusive property of East or West, nor of small 
groups of men or women. 
Nonetheless the story is a gloomy and often discouraging one. What 
tempers it today is, here and there, the emergence of a new intellectual and 
political conscience. This is the second concern that went into the making 
of this book. However much there are laments that the old course of 
humanistic study has been subject to politicized pressures, to what has been 
called the culture of complaint, to all sorts of egregiously overstated claims 
on behalf of "Western" or "feminist" or "Mrocentric" and "Islamocentric" 
values, that is not all there is today. Take as an example the extraordinary 
change in studies of the Middle East, which when I wrote Orienta/ism were 
still dominated by an aggressively masculine and condescending ethos. To 
mention only works that have appeared in the last three or four years-Lila 
Abu-Lughod's Veiled Sentiment.r, Leila Ahmed's Women and Gender in I.rlam, 
Fedwa Malti-Douglas's Woman'.r Body, Woman'.r World 4-a very different sort 
of idea about Islam, the Arabs, and the Middle East has challenged, and to 
a considerable degree undermined, the old despotism. Such works are femi­
nist, but not exclusivist; they demonstrate the diversity and complexity of 
experience that worlcs beneath the totalizing discourses of Orientalism and 
of Middle East (overwhelmingly male) nationalism; they are both intellectu­
ally and politically sophisticated, attuned to the best theoretical and histori­
cal scholarship, engaged but not demagogic, sensitive to but not maudlin 
about women's experience; finally, while written by scholars of different 
backgrounds and education, they are works that are in dialogue with, and 
contribute to, the political situation of women in the Middle East. 
Along with Sara Suleri's The Rhetoric of Engli.rh India and Lisa Lowe's 
Critical Terrain.r, 5 revisionist scholarship of this son has varied, if it has not 
altogether broken up the geography of the Middle East and India as homog­
enous, reductively understood domains. Gone are the binary oppositions 
dear to the nationalist and imperialist enterprise. Instead we begin to sense 
that old authority cannot simply be replaced by new authority, but that new Introduction XXV 
alignments made across borders, types, nations, and essences ate rapidly 
coming into view, and it is those new alignments that now provoke and 
challenge the fundamentally static notion of idmtity that has been the core 
of cultural thought during the era of imperialism. Throughout the exchange 
between Europeans and their "others" that began systematically half a 
millennium ago, the one idea that has scarcely varied is that there is an "us" 
and a "them," each quite settled, clear, unassailably self-evident. As I discuss 
it in Orimtalitm, the division goes back to Greek thought about barbarians, 
but, whoever originated this kind of "identity" thought, by the nineteenth 
century it had become the hallmark of imperialist cultures as well as those 
cultures trying to resist the encroachments of Europe. 
We are still the inheritors of that style by which one is defined by the 
nation, which in turn derives its authority from a supposedly unbroken 
tradition. In the United States this concern over cultural identity has of 
course yielded up the contest over what books and authorities constitute 
"our" tradition. In the main, trying to say that this or that book is (or is not) 
part of "our" tradition is one of the most debilitating exercises imaginable. 
Besides, its excesses are much more frequent than its contributions to histor­
ical accuracy. For the record then, I have no patience with the position that 
"we" should only or mainly be concerned with what is "ours," any more than 
I can condone reactions to such a view that require Arabs to read Arab books, 
use Arab methods, and the like. As C.L.R. James used to say, Beethoven 
belongs as much to West Indians as he does to Germans, since his music is 
now part of the human heritage. 
Yet the ideological concern over identity is understandably entangled 
with the interests and agendas of various groups-not all of them oppressed 
minorities-that wish to set priorities reflecting these interests. Since a great 
deal of this book is all about what to read of recent history and how to read 
it, I shall only quickly summarize my ideas here. Before we can agree on 
what the American identity is made of, we have to concede that as an 
immigrant settler society superimposed on the ruins of considerable native 
presence, American identity is too varied to be a unitary and homogenous 
thing; indeed the battle within it is between advocates of a unitary identity 
and those who see the whole as a complex but not reductively unified one. 
This opposition implies two different perspectives, two historiographies, one 
linear and subsuming, the other contrapuntal and often nomadic. 
My argument is that only the second perspective is fully sensitive to the 
reality of historical experience. Partly because of empire, all cultures are 
involved in one another; none is single and pure, all are hybrid, heteroge­
nous, extraordinarily differentiated, and unmonolithic. This, I believe, is as 
true of the contemporary United States as it is of the modern Arab world, XXVl Introduction 
where in each instance respectively so much has been made of the dangers 
of"un-Americanism" and the threats to "Arabism." Defensive, reactive, and 
even paranoid nationalism is, alas, frequently woven into the very fabric of 
education, where children as well as older students are taught to venerate 
and celebrate the uniqueness of their tradition (usually and invidiously at the 
expense of others). It is to such uncritical and unthinking forms of education 
and thought that this book is addressed-as a corrective, as a patient alterna­
tive, as a frankly exploratory possibility. In its writing· I have availed myself 
of the utopian space still provided by the university, which I believe must 
remain a place where such vital issues are investigated, discussed, retlected 
on. For it to become a site where social and political issues are actually either 
imposed or resolved would be to remove the university's function and turn 
it into an adjunct to whatever political party is in power. 
I do not wish to be misunderstood. Despite its extraordinary cultural 
diversity, the United States is, and will surely remain, a coherent nation. The 
same· is true of other English-speaking countries (Britain, New Zealand, 
Australia, Canada) and even of France, which now contains large groups of 
immigrants. Much of the polemical divisiveness and polarized debate that 
Art,hur Schlesinger speaks of as hurting the study of history in The Difuniting 
of America is there of course, but it does not, in my opinion, portend a 
dissolution of the republic. 6 On the whole it is better to explore history 
rather than to repress or deny it; the fact that the United States contains so 
many histories, many ofthem now clamoring for attention, is by no m~ans 
to be suddenly feared since many of them were always there, and out of 
them an American society and politics (and even a style of historical writing) 
were in fact created. In other words, the· result of present debates over 
multiculturalism is hardly likely to be ''Lebanonization," and if these debates 
point a way for political changes and' changes in the way women, minorities, 
and recent immigrants see themselves, then that is not to be feared or 
defended against. What does need to be remembered is that narratives of 
emancipation and enlightenment in their strongest form were also narratives 
of integration not separation,.the stories of people who had been excluded 
from the main group but who were now fighting for a place in it. And if the 
old and habitual ideas of the main group were not flexible or generous 
enough to admit new groups, then these ideas need changing, a far better 
thing to do than reject the emerging groups. 
The last· point I want to make is that this book is an exile's book. For 
objective reasons that I had no control over, I grew up as an Arab with a 
Western education. Ever since I can remember, I have felt that I belonged 
to both worlds, without being completely of either one or the other. During 
my lifetime, however, the parts of the' Arab world that I was most attached Introduction xxvii 
to either have been changed utterly by civil upheavals and war, or have 
simply ceased to exist. And for long periods of time I have been an outsider 
in the United States, particularly when it went to war against, and was 
deeply opposed to, the (far from perfect) cultures and societies of the Arab 
world. Yet when I say "exile" I do not mean something sad or deprived. On 
the contrary belonging, as it were, to both sides of the imperial divide 
enables you to understand them more easily. Moreover New York, where 
the whole of this book was written, is in so many ways the exilic city par 
excellence; it also contains within. itself the Manichean structure of the colo­
nial city described by Fanon. Perhaps all this has stimulated the kirids of 
interests and interpretations ventured here, but these circumstances cer­
tainly made it possible for me to feel as if I belonged to more than one 
history and more than one group. As to whether such a state can be regarded 
as really a salutary alternative to the normal sense of belonging to only one 
culture and feeling a sense of loyalty to only one nation, the reader must 
now decide. 
The argument of this book was first presented in various lecture series given 
at universities in the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada from 
1985 to 1988. For these extended opportunities, I am greatly indebted to 
faculty and students at the University of Kent, Cornell University, the 
University of Western Ontario; the University of Toronto, the University of 
Essex; and, in a considerably earlier version ofthe argument, the University 
of Chicago. Later versions of individual sections of this book were also 
delivered as lectures at the Yeats International School at Sligo, Oxford 
University (as the George Antonius Lecture at St Antony's College), the 
University of Minnesota, King's College of Cambridge University, the 
Princeton University Davis Center, Birkbeck College of London University, 
and the University of Puerto Rico. My gratitude to Declan Kiberd, Seamus 
Deane, Derek Hopwood, Peter Nesselroth, :rony Tanner, Natalie Davis and 
Gayan Prakash, A. Walton Litz, 'Peter Hulme, Deirdre David, Ken Bates, 
Tessa Blackstone, Bernard Sharrett, Lyn Innis, Peter Mulford, Gervasio 
Luis Garcia, and Maria de los Angeles Castro for the favor of inviting, and 
then hosting, me is warm and sincere. In 1989 I was honored when I was 
asked to give the first Raymond Williams Memorial Lecture in London; 'I 
spoke about Camus on that occasion, and thanks to Graham Martin and the 
late Joy Williams, it was a memorable experience for me. I need hardly say 
that many·parts of this book are suffused with the ideas and the human and 
moral example of Raymond Williams, a good friend and a great critic. 
I shamelessly availed myself of various intellectual, political, and cultural 
associations as I worked on this book. Those include close personal friends XXVlll Introduction 
who are also editors of journals in which some of these pages first appeared: 
Tom Mitchell (of Cn"ticall111Juiry), Richard Poirier (of Ran"tan Revie'W), Ben 
Sonnenberg (of Grand Street), A Sivanandan (of Race and Class), JoAnn 
Wypijewski (of The Nation), and Karl Miller (of The London Review of Books). 
I am also grateful to editors of The Guardian (London) and to Paul Keegan 
of Penguin under whose auspices some of the ideas in this book were first 
expressed. Other friends on whose indulgence, hospitality, and criticisms I 
depended were Donald Mitchell, Ibrahim Abu-Lughod, Masao Miyoshi, 
Jean Franco, Marianne McDonald, Anwar Abdel-Malek, Eqbal Ahmad, 
Jonathan Culler, Gayatri Spivak, Homi Bhabha, Benita Parry, and Barbara 
Harlow. It gives me panicular pleasure to acknowledge the brilliance and 
perspicacity of several students of mine at Columbia University, for whom 
any teacher would have been grateful. These young scholars and critics gave 
me the full benefit of their exciting work, which is now both well published 
and well known: Anne McClintock, Rob Nixon, Suvendi Perera, Gauri 
Viswanathan, and Tim Brennan. 
In the preparation of the manuscript, I have been very ably helped in 
different ways by Yumna Siddiqi, Aamir Mufti, Susan Lhota, David Beams, 
Paola di Robilant, Deborah Poole, Ana Dopico, Pierre Gagnier, and Kieran 
Kennedy. Zaineb Istrabadi performed the difficult task of deciphering IllY 
appalling handwriting and then putting it into successive drafts with admira­
ble patience and skill. I am very indebted to her for unstinting support, good 
humor, and intelligence. At various ~tages of editorial preparation Frances 
Coady and Carmen Callil were helpful readers and good friends of what I 
was trying to present here. I must also record my deep gratitude and almost 
thunderstruck admiration for Elisabeth Sifton: friend of many years, superb 
editor, exacting and always sympathetic critic. George Andreou was unfail­
ingly helpful in getting things right as the book moved through the publish­
ing process. To MariaJD, Wadie, and Najla Said, who lived with the author 
of this book in often trying circumstances, heartfelt thanks for their constant 
love and support. 
New York, New York 
July 1991 CULTURE 
AND 
IMPERIALISM CHAPTER ONE 
OVERLAPPING 
TERRITORIES, 
INTERTWINED 
HISTORIES 
Silence from and abour rhe subjecr was rhe order of rhe day. Some of rhe silences 
were broken, and some were mainrained by aurhors who lived wirh and wirhin 
rhe policing srraregies. Whar I am inreresred in are rhe srraregies for break­
ing ir. 
ToNI MoRRISON, Playing in the Dark 
Hisrory, in orher words, is nor a calculating machine. Ir unfolds in rhe mind and 
rhe imaginarion, and ir rakes body in rhe mulrifarious responses of a people's 
culrure, irself rhe infinirely subrle mediation of marerial realiries, of underpin­
ning economic facr, of grirry objecrivities. 
BASIL DAVIDSON, Africa in Modrm History 
( I ) 
Empire, Geography, and Culture 
A ppeals to the past are among the commonest of strategies in interpreta­
tions of the present. What animates such appeals is not only disagree­
. ment about what happened in the past and .what the past was, but 
uncenainty about whether the past really is past, over and concluded, or 
whether it continues, albeit in di1ferent forms, perhaps. This problem ani­
mates all sorts of discussions--about influence, about blame and judgement, 
about present actualities and future priorities. 4 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
In one of his most famous early critical essays, T. S. Eliot takes up a 
similar constellation of issues, and although the occasion as well as the 
intention of his essay is almost purely aesthetic, one can use his formulations 
to inform other realms of experience. The poet, Eliot says, is obviously 
an individual talent, but he works within a tradition that cannot be 
merely inherited but can only be obtained "by great labour." Tradition, he 
continues, 
involves, in the first place, the historical sense, which we may call 
nearly indispensable to anyone who would continue to be a poet 
beyond his twenty-fifth year; and the historical sense involves a percep­
tion, not only of the pasmess of the past, but of its presenc~; the 
historical sense compels a man to write not merely with his own 
generation in his bones, but with a feeling that the whole of the 
literature ofEurope from Homer and within it the whole of the litera­
ture of his own country has a simultaneous existence and composes a 
simultaneous order. This historical sense, which is a sense of the time­
less as well as of the temporal and of the timeless and of the temporal 
together, is what makes a writer traditional. And it is at the same time 
what makes a writer most acutely conscious of his place in time, of his 
own contemporaneity. 
No poet, no artist of any art, has his complete meaning alone.' 
The force of these comments is directed equally, I think, at poets who 
think critically and at critics whose work aims at a close appreciation of the 
poetic process. The main idea is that even as we must fully comprehend the 
pastness of the past, there is no just way in which the past can be quarantined 
from the present. Past and present inform each other, each implies the other 
and, in the totally ideal sense intended by Eliot, each co-exists with the 
other. What Eliot proposes, in short, is a vision of literary tradition that, 
while it respects temporal succession, is not wholly commanded by it. 
Neither past nor present, any more than any poet or artist, has a complete 
meaning alone. 
Eliot's synthesis of past, present, and future, however, is idealistic and in 
important ways a function of his own peculiar history;~ also, its conception 
of time leaves out the combativeness with which individuals and institutions 
decide on what is tradition and what is not, what relevant and what not. But 
his central idea is valid: how we formulate or represent the past shapes our 
understanding and views of the present. Let me give an example. During the 
Gulf War of 1990'-91, the collision between Iraq and the United Stares was Empire, Geography, and Culture 5 
a function of two fundamentally opposed histories, each used to advantage 
by the official establishment of each country. As construed by the Iraqi Baath 
Party, modern Arab history shows the unrealized, unfulfilled promise of 
Arab independence, a promise traduced both by "the West" and by a whole 
array of more recent enemies, like Arab reaction and Zionism. Iraq's bloody 
occupation of Kuwait was, therefore, justified not only on Bismarckian 
grounds, but also because it was believed that the Arabs had to right the 
wrongs done against thein and wrest from imperialism one of its greatest 
prizes. Conversely, in the American view of the past, the United States was 
not a classical imperial power, but a righter of wrongs around the world, in 
pursuit of tyranny, in defense of freedom no matter the place or cost. The 
war inevitably pitted these versions of the past against each other. 
Eliot's ideas about the complexity of the relationship between past and 
present are particularly suggestive in the debate over the meaning of"impe­
rialism," a word and an idea today so controversia~ so fraught with all sorts 
of questions, doubts, polemics, and ideological premises as nearly to resist 
use altogether. To some extent of course the debate involves definitions and 
attempts at delimitations of the very notion itself: was imperialism princi­
pally economic, how far did it extend, what were its causes, was it system­
atic, when (or whether) did it end? The roll call of names who have 
contributed to the discussion in Europe and America is impressive: Kautsky, 
Hilferding, Luxemburg, Hobson, Lenin, Schumpeter, Arendt, Magdoff, Paul 
Kennedy. And in recent years such works published in the United States as 
Paul,Kennedy's The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers, the revisionist history 
of William Appleman Williams, Gabriel Kolko, Noam Chomsky, Howard 
Zinn, and Walter Lefeber, and studious defenses or explanations of Ameri­
can policy as non-imperialist written by various strategists, theoreticians, 
and sages-all this has kept the question of imperialism, and its applicability 
(or not) to the United States, the main power of the day, very much alive. 
These authorities debated largely political and economic questions. Yet 
scarcely any attention has been paid to what I believe is the privileged role 
of culture in the modern imperial experience, and little notice taken of the 
fact that the extraordinary global reach of classical nineteenth- and early­
twentieth-century Eur9pean imperialism still casts .a considerable shadow 
over our own times. Hardly any North American, African, European, Latin 
American, Indian, Caribbean, Australian individual-the list is very long­
who is alive today has not been touched by the empires of the past. Britain 
and France' between them controlled immense territories: Canada, Australia, 
New Zealand, the colonies in North and South America and the Caribbean, 
large swatches of Africa, the Middle East, the Far East (Britain will hold 6 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
Hong Kong as a colony until 1997), and the Indian subcontinent in its 
entirety-all these fell under the sway of and in time were liberated from 
British or French rule; in addition, the United States, Russia, and several 
lesser European countries, to say nothing of Japan and Turkey, were also 
imperial powers for some or all of the nineteenth century. This pattern of 
dominions or possessions laid the groundwork for what is in effect now a 
fully global world. Electronic communications, the global extent of trade, of 
availability of resources, of travel, of information about weather patterns and 
ecological change have joined together even the most distant corners of the 
world. This set of patterns, I believe,. was first established and made possible 
by the modern empires. 
Now I am temperamentally and philosophically opposed to vast system­
building or to totalistic theories ofhuman history. But I must say that having 
studied and indeed lived within the modern empires, I am struck by how 
constantly expanding, how inexorably integrative they were. Whether in 
Marx, or in conservative works like those by J. R. Seeley, or in modern 
analyses like those by D. K. Fieldhouse and C. C. Eldridge (whose England'.r 
Mission is a central work), 3 one is made to see that the British empire 
integrated and fused things within it, and taken together it and other empires 
made the world one. Yet no individual, and certainly not I, can see or fully 
grasp this whole imperial world. 
When we read the debate between contemporary historians Patrick 
O'Brien~ and Davis and Huttenback (whose important book Mammon and the 
Pursuit of Empire tries to quantifY the actual profitability of imperial activi­
ties),S or when we look at earlier debates such as the Robinson-Gallagher 
controversy, 6 or at the work of the dependency and worJd .. accumulation 
economists Andre Gunder Frank and Samir Amin, 7 as literary and cultural 
historians, we are. compelled to ask what all this means for interpretations 
of the Victorian novel, say, or of French historiography, of Italian grand 
opera, of German metaphysics of the same period. We are at a point in our 
work when we can no longer ignore empires and the imperial context in our 
studies. To speak, as O'Brien does, of "the propaganda for an expanding 
empire [which] created illusions of security and false expectations that high 
returns would accrue to those who invested beyond its boundaries" 8 is in 
effect to speak of an atmosphere created by both empire and novels, by racial 
theory and geographical speculation, by the concept of national identity and 
urban (or rural) routine. The phrase "false expectations" suggests Great 
Expectations, "invested beyond its boundaries" suggests Joseph Sedley and 
Becky Sharp, "created illusions," suggests Illusions perduu-the crossings 
over between culture and imperialism are compelling. Empire, Geography, and Culture 7 
It is difficult to connect these different realms, to show the involvements 
of culture with expanding empires, to make observations about art that 
preserve its unique endowments and at the same time map its affiliations, 
but, I submit, we must attempt this, and set the art in the global, earthly 
context. Territory and possessions are at stake, geography and power. Ev­
erything about human history is rooted in the earth, which has meant that 
we must think about habitation, but it has also meant that people have 
planned to have more territory and therefore must do something about its 
indigenous residents. At some very basic level, imperialism means thinking 
about, settling on, controlling land that you do not possess, that is distant, 
that is lived on and owned by others. For all kinds of reasons it attraCts some 
people and often involves untold misery for others. Yet it is generally true 
til at literary historians who study the great sixteenth-century poet Edmund 
Spenser, for example, do not connect his bloodthirsty plans for Ireland,. 
where he imagined a British army virtually exterminating the native inhabi­
tants, with his poetic achievement or with the history of British rule over 
Ireland, which continues today. 
For the purposes of this book, I have maintained a focus on actual contests 
over land and the land's people. What I have tried to do is a kind of 
geographical inquiry into historical experience, and I have kept in mind the 
idea that the earth is in effect one world, in which empty, uninhabited spaces 
virtually do not exist. Just as none of us is outside or beyond geography, 
none of us is completely free from the struggle over geography. That 
struggle is complex and interesting because it is not only about soldiers and 
cannons but also about ideas, about forms, about images and imaginings. 
A whole range of people in the so-called Western or metropolitan world, 
as well as their counterparts in the Third or formerly colonized world, share 
a sense that the era of high or classical imperialism, which came to a climax 
in what the historian Eric Hobsb,wm has so interestingly described as "the ' 
age of empire" and more or less formally ended with the dismantling of the 
great colonial structures after World War Two, has in one way or another 
continued to exert considerable cultural influence in the present. For all 
sorts of reasons, they feel a new urgency about understanding the pastness 
or not of the past, and this urgency is carried over into perceptions of the 
present and the future. 
At the center of these perceptions is a fact that few dispute, namely, that 
during the nineteenth century unprecedented power--compared with 
which the 'powers of Rome, Spain, Baghdad, or Constantinople in their day 
were far less formidable--was concentrated in Britain and France, and later 
. in other Western countries (the United States, especially). This century 8 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
climaxed "the rise of the West," and Western power allowed the imperial 
metropolitan centers to acquire and accumulate territory and subjects on a 
truly astonishing scale. Consider that in 18oo Western powers claimed 55" 
percent but actually held approximately 35 percent of the earth's surface, and 
that by 1878 the proportion was 67 percent, a rate of increa~e of 83,ooo square 
miles per year. By 1914, the annual rate had risen to an astonishing 24o,ooo 
square miles, and Europe held a grand total of roughly 85 percent of the 
earth as colonies, protectorates, dependencies, dominions, and common­
wealths.9 No other associated set of colonies in history was as large, none so 
totally dominated, none so unequal in power to the Western metropolis. As 
a result, says William McNeill in The Purl'uitofPower, "the world was united 
into a single interacting whole as never before." 10 And-in Europe itself at the 
end of the nineteenth century, scarcely a corner oflife was untouched by the 
facts of empire; the economies were hungry for overseas markets, raw 
materials, cheap labor, and hugely profitable land, and defense and foreign­
policy establishments were more and more committed to the maintenance 
of vast tracts of distant territory and large numbers of subjugated peoples. 
When the Western powers were not in close, sometimes ruthless competi­
tion with one another for more colonies--all modern empires, says V. G. 
Kiernan, 11 imitated one another-they .were hard at work settling, survey­
ing, studying, and of course ruling the territories under their jurisdictions. 
The American experience, as Richard Van Alstyne makes clear in The 
RiringAmerican Empire, was from the beginning founded upon the idea of"an 
imperium--a dominion, state or sovereignty that would expand in population 
and territory, and increase in strength and power." 12 There were clai~s for 
North American territory to be made and fought over (with astonishing 
success); there were native peoples to be dominated, variously exterminated, 
variously dislodged; and then, as the republic increased in age and hemi­
spheric power, there were distant lands to be designated vital to American 
interests, to be intervened in and fought over-e.g., the Philippines, the 
Caribbean, Central America, the "Barbary Coast," pans of Europe and the 
Middle East, Vietnam, Korea. Curiously, though, so influential has been the 
discourse insisting on American specialness, altruism, and opportunity that 
"imperialism" as a word or ideology has turned up only rarely and recently 
in accounts of United States culture, politics, history. But the connection 
between imperial politics and culture is astonishingly direct. American 
attitudes to American "greamess," to hierarchies of race, to the perils of other 
revolutions (the American revolution being considered unique and some­
how unrepeatable anywhere else in the world) 13 have remained constant, 
have dictated, have obscured, the realities of empire, while apologists for 
overseas American interests have insisted on American innocence, doing Empire, Geography, and Culture 9 
good, fighting for freedom. Graham Greene's character Pyle, in The t:JEi'et 
American, embodies this cultural formation with merciless accuracy. 
Yet for citizens of nineteenth-century Britain and France, empire was a 
major topic of unembarrassed cultural attention. British India and French 
North Africa alone played inestimable roles in the imagination, economy, 
political life, and social fabric of British and French society, and if we 
mention names like Delacroix, Edmund Burke, Ruskin, Carlyle, James and 
John Stuart Mill, Kipling, Balzac, Nerval, Flaubert, or Conrad, we shall be 
. mapping a tiny corner of a far vaster reality than even their immense 
collective talents cover. There were s~holars, administrators, travellers, trad­
ers, parliamentarians, merchants, novelists, theorists, speculators, adventur­
ers, visionaries, poets, and every variety·of outcast and misfit in the outlying 
possessions of these two imperial powers, each of whom contributed to the 
formation of a colonial actuality existing at the heart of metropolitan life. 
As I shall be using the term, "imperialism" means the practice, the theory, 
and the attitudes of a dominating metropolitan center ruling a distant terri­
tory; "colonialism," which is almost always a consequence of imperialism, 
is the implanting of settlements on distant territory. As Michael Doyle 
puts it: "Empire is a relationship, formal or informal, in which one state con­
trols the effective political sovereignty of another political society. It can 
be achieved by force, by political collaboration, by economic,· social, or 
cultural dependence. Imperialism is simply the process or policy of estab­
lishing or maintaining an empire." 14 In our time, direct colonialism has 
largely ended; imperialism, as we shall see, lingets where it has always been, 
in a kind of general cultural sphere as well as in specific politica~ ideological, 
economic, and social practices. 
Neither imperialism nor colonialism is a simple act of accumulation and 
acquisition. Both are supported and perhaps even impelled by impressive 
ideological formations that include notions that certain territories and peo­
ple require and beseech domination, as well as forms of knowledge affiliated 
with domination: the vocabulary of classic nineteenth-century imperial cul­
ture is plentiful with words and concepts like "inferior" or "subject ~aces," 
"subordinate peoples," "dependency," "expansion," and "authority." Out of 
the imperial experiences, notions about culture were clarified, reinforced, 
criticized, or rejected. As for the curious but perhaps allowable idea propa­
gated a century ago by J. R. Seeley that some of Europe's overseas empires 
were originally acquired absentmindedly, it does not by any stretch of the 
imagination account for their inconsistency, persistence, and systematized 
acquisition and administration, let alone their augmented rule and sheer 
presence. As David Landes has said in The Unbound Prometheus, "the decision 
of certain European powers ... to establish 'plantations,' that is to treat their 10 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
colonies as continuous enterprises was, whatever one may think of the 
morality, a momentous innovation." 15 That is the question that concerns me 
here: given the initial, perhaps obsc~rely derived and motivated move 
toward empire from Europe to the rest of the world, how did the idea and 
the practice of it gain the consistency and density of continuous enterprise, 
which it did by the latter part of the nineteenth century? 
The primacy of the British and French empires by no means obscures the 
quite remarkable modern expansion of Spain, Portugal, Holland, Belgium, 
Germany, Italy, and, in a different way, Russia and the United States. Russia, 
however, acquired its imperial territories almost exclusively by adjacence. 
Unlike Britain or France, which jumped thousands of miles beyond their 
own borders to other continents, Russia moved to swallow whatever land or 
peoples stood next to its borders, which in the process kept moving farther 
and farther east and south. But in the English and French cases, the sheer 
distance of attractive territories summoned the projection of far-flung inter­
ests, and that is my focus here, panly because I am interested in examining 
the set of cultural forms and structures of feeling which it produces, and 
partly because overseas domination is the world I grew up in and still live 
in. Russia's and America's joint superpower status, enjoyed for a little less 
than half a century, derives from quite different histories and from different 
imperial trajectories. There are several varieties of domination and re­
sponses to it, but the "Western" one, along with the resistance it provoked, 
is the subject of this book. 
In the expansion of the great Western empires, profit and hope of funher 
profit were obviously tremendously important, as the attractions of spices, 
sugar, slaves, rubber, cotton, opium, tin, gold, and silver over centuries 
amply testify. So also was inertia, the investment in already going enter­
prises, tradition, and the market or institutional forces that kept the enter­
prises going. But there is more than that to imperialism and colonialism. 
There was a commitment to them over and above profit, a commitment in 
constant circulation and recirculation, which, on the one hand, allowed 
decent men and women to accept the notion that distant territories and their 
native peoples should be subjugated, and, on the other, replenished metropol­
itan energies so that these decent people could think of the imperium as a 
protracted, almost metaphysical obligation to rule subordinate, inferior, or 
less advanced peoples. We must not forget that there was very little domes­
uc resistance to these empires, although they were very frequendy estab­
lished and maintained under adverse and even disadvantageous conditions. 
Not only were immense hardships endured by the colonizers, but there was 
always the tremendously risky physical disparity between a small number of Empire, Geography, and Culture II 
Europeans at a very great distance from home and the much larger number 
of natives on their home territory. In India, for instance, by the 193os "a mere 
4-ooo British civil servants assisted by 6o,ooo soldiers and 9o,ooo civilians 
(businessmen and clergy for the most part) had billeted themselves upon a 
country of 300 million persons." 16 The will, self-confidence, even arrogance 
necessary to maintain such a state of affairs can only be guessed at, but, as 
we shall see in the texts of A Parsage to India and Kim, these attitudes are at 
least as significant as the number of people in the army or civil service, or 
the millions of pounds England derived from India. 
For the enterprise of empire depends upon the idea of having an empire, as 
Conrad so powerfully seems to have realized, and all kinds of preparations 
are made for it within a culture; then in turn imperialism acquires a kind of 
coherence, a set of experiences, and a presence of ruler and ruled alike 
within the culture. As an acute modern student of imperialism has put it: 
Modern imperiali~m has been an accretion of elements, not all of equal 
weight, that can be traced back through every epoch of history. Perhaps 
its ultimate causes, with those of war, are to be found less in tangible 
material wants than in the uneasy tensions of societies distorted by class 
division, with their rellection in distorted ideas in men's mindsP 
One acute indication of how crucially the tensions, inequalities, and injus­
tices of the home or metropolitan society were refracted and elaborated in 
the i111perial culture is given by the distinguished conservative historian of 
empire D. K. Fieldhouse: "The basis of imperial authority," he says, "was the 
mental attitude of the colonist. His acceptance of subordination-whether 
through a positive sense of common interest with the parent state, or 
through inability to conceive of any alternative-made empire durable." 18 
Fieldhouse was discussing white colonists in the Americas, but his general 
point goes beyond that: the durability of empire was sustained on both sides, 
that of the rulers and that of the distant ruled, and in turn each had a set of 
interpretations of their common history with its own perspective, historical 
·sense, emotions, and traditions. What an Algerian intellectual today remem­
bers of his country's colonial past focusses severely on such events as 
France's military attacks on villages and the torture of prisoners during the 
war ofliberation, on the exultation over independence in 1961; for his French 
counterpart, who may have taken part in Algerian affairs or whose family 
lived in Algeria, there is chagrin at having "lost" Algeria, a more positive 
attitude toward the French colonizing mission-with its schools, nicely 
planned cities, pleasant life-and perhaps even a sense that "troublemakers" 12. OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
and communists disturbed the idyllic relationship between "us" and "them." 
To a very great degree the era of high nineteenth-century imperialism is 
over: France and Britain gave up their most splendid possessions after World 
War Two, and lesser powers also divested ·themselves of their far-flung 
dominions. Yet, once again recalling the words ofT. S. Eliot, although that 
era clearly had an identity all its own, the meaning of the imperial past is 
not totally contained within it, hut has entered the reality of hundreds of 
millions of people, where its existence as shared memory and as a highly 
confl.ictual texture of culture, ideology, and policy still exercises tremendous 
force. Frantz Fanon says, "We should flatly refuse the situation to which the 
Western countries wish to condemn us. Colonialism and imperialism have 
not paid their score when they withdraw their flags and their police forces 
from our territories. For centuries the [foreign] capitalists have behaved in 
the underdeveloped world like nothing more than criminals." 19 We must 
take stock of the nostalgia for empire, as well as the anger and resentment 
it provokes in those who were ruled, and we must try to look carefully and 
integrally at the culture that nurtured the sentiment, rationale, and above all 
the imagination of empire. And we must also.try to grasp the hegemony of 
the imperial ideology, which by the end of the nineteenth century had 
become completely embedded in the affairs of cultures whose less regretta­
ble features we still celebrate. 
There is, I believe, a quite serious split in our critical consciousness today, 
which allows us to spend a great deal of time elaborating Carlyle's and 
Ruskin's aesthetic theories, for example, without giving attention to the 
authority that their ideas simultaneously bestowed on the subjugation of 
inferior peoples and colonial territories. To take another example, unless we 
can comprehend how the great European realistic novel accomplished one 
of its principal purpose9--almost unnoticeahly sustaining the society's con­
sent in overseas expansion, a consent that, in J. A. Hobson's words, "the 
selfish forces which direct Imperialism should utilize the protective colours 
of ... disinterested movements" 20 such as philanthropy, religion, science and 
art-we will misread both the culture's importance and its resonances in the 
empire, then and now . 
. Doing this by no means involves hurling critical epithets at European or, 
generally, Western art and culture by way of wholesale condemnation. Not 
at all. What I want to examine is how the processes of imperialism occurred 
beyond the level of economic laws and political decisions, and-by predis­
position, by the authority of recognizable cultural formations, by continuing 
consolidation within education, literature, and the visual and musical arts­
were manifested at another very signific~nt level, that of the national culture, Empire, Geography, and Culture 
which we have tended to sanitize as a realm of unchanging intellectual 
monuments, free from worldly affiliations. William Blake is unrestrained on 
this point: "The Foundation of Empire," he says in his annotations to 
Reynolds's Discounes, "is Art and Science. Remove them or Degrade them 
and the Empire is No more. Empire follows Art and not vice versa as 
Englishmen suppose." 21 
What, then, is the connection between the pursuit of national imperial 
aims and the general national culture? Recent intellectual and academic 
discourse has tended to separate and divide these: most scholars are special­
ists; most of the attention that is endowed with the status of expertise is given 
to fairly autonomous subjects, e.g., the Victorian industrial novel, French 
colonial policy in North Africa, and so forth. The tendency for fields and 
specializations to subdivide and proliferate, I have for a long while argued, 
is contrary to an understanding of the whole, when the character, interpreta­
tion, and direction or tendency of cultural experience are at issue. To lose 
sight of or ignore the national and international context of, say, Dickens's 
representations of Victorian businessmen, and to focus only on the internal 
coherence of theii: roles in his novels is to miss an essential connection 
between his fiction and its historical world. And understanding that connec­
tion does not reduce or diminish the novels' value as works of an: on the 
contrary, because of their worldliness, because of their complex affiliations 
with their real setting, they are more interesting and more valuable as works 
of art. 
~t the opening of Dombey and Son, Dickens wishes to underline the impor­
tance to Dombey of his son's birth: 
The earth was made for Dombey and Son to trade in, and the sun and 
moon were made to give them light. Rivers and seas were formed to 
float their ships; rainbows gave them promise of fair weather; winds 
blew for or against their enterprises; stars and planets circled in their 
orbits, to preserve inviolate a system of which they were the centre. 
Common abbreviations took new meanings in his eyes, and had sole 
reference to them: A. D. had no concern with anno Domini, but stood 
for anno Dombei-and Son.22 
As a description ofDombey's overweening self-importance, his narcissis­
tic obliviousness, his coercive attitude to his barely born child, the service 
performed by this passage is clear. But one must also ask, how could Dombey 
think that the universe, and the whole of time, was his to trade in? We should 
also see in this passage-which is by no means a central one in the novel-OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
an assumption specific to a British novelist in the 184os: that, as Raymond 
Williams has it, this was "the decisive period in which the consciousness of 
a new phase of civilization was being formed arid expressed." But then, why 
does Williams describe "this transforming, liberating, and threatening 
time"23 without reference to India, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, since 
that is where transformed British life expanded to and filled, as Dickens slyly 
indicates? 
Williams is a great critic, whose work I admire and have learned much 
from, but I sense a limitation in his feeling that English literature is mainly 
about England, an idea that is central to his work as it is to that of most 
scholars and critics. Moreover, scholars who write about novels deal more 
or less exclusively with them (though Williams is not one of those). These 
habits seem to be guided by a powerful if imprecise notion that works of 
literature are autonomous, whereas, as I shall be trying to show throughout 
this book, the literature itself makes constant references to itself as somehow 
participating in Europe's overseas expansion, and therefore creates what 
Williams calls "structures ciffeeling" that support, elaborate, and consolidate 
the practice of empire. True, Dombey is neither Dickens himself nor the 
whole of English literature, but the way in which Dickens expresses Dom­
bey's egoism recalls, mocks, yet ultimately depends on the tried and true 
discourses of imperial free trade, the British mercantile ethos, its sense of all 
but unlimited opportunities for commercial advancement abroad. 
These matters should not be severed from our understanding of the 
nineteenth-century novel, any more than literature can be chopped otf from 
history and society. The supposed autonomy of works of art enjoins a kind 
of separation which, I think, imposes an uninteresting limitation that the 
works themselves resolutely will not make. Still, I have deliberately ab­
stained from advancing a completely worked out theory of the conn~tion 
between literature and culture on the one hand, and imperialism on the 
other. Instead, I hope the connections will emerge from their explicit places 
in the various texts, with the enveloping setting-empire-there to make 
connections with, to develop, elaborate, expand, or criticize. Neither culture 
nor imperialism is inert, and so the connections between them as historical 
experiences are dynamic and complex. My principal aim is not to separate 
but to connect, and I am interested in this for the main philosophical and 
methodological reason that cultural forms are hybrid, mixed, impure, and 
the time has come in cultural analysis to reconnect their analysis with their 
actuality. Images of the Past, Pure and Impure IJ 
( II ) 
Images of the Past, Pure and Impure 
A s th~ twentieth cenrury moves to a close, there has been a gathering 
awareness nearly everywhere of the lines bet'Ween culrures, the divi­
sions and differences that not only allow us to discriminate one culrure from 
another, but also enable us to see the extent to which culrures are humanly 
made strucrures of both authority and participation, benevolent in what they 
include, incorporate, and validate, less benevolent in what they exclude and 
demote. 
There is in all nationally defined culrures, I believe, an aspiration co 
sovereignty, co sway, and co dominance. In this, French and British, Indian 
and Japanese culrures concur. At the same time, paradoxically, we have 
never been as aware as we now are of how oddly hybrid historical and 
culrural experiences are, of how they partake of many often contradictory 
experiences and domains, cross national boundaries, defy the police action of 
· simple dogma and loud patriotism. Far from being unitary or monolithic or 
autonomous things, culrures acrually assume more "foreign" elemenrs, al­
terities, differences, than they consciously exclude. Who in India or Algeria 
today can confidently separate out the British or French component of the 
past from present acrualities, and who in Britain or France can draw a clear 
circle around British London or French Paris that would exclude the impact 
of India and Algeria upon those two imperial cities? 
These are not nostalgically academic or theoretical questions, for as a 
brief excursion or two will ascertain, they have important social and political 
consequences. Both London and Paris have large immigrant populations 
from the former colonies, which themselves have a large residue of British 
and French culrure in their daily life. But that is obvious. Consider, for a 
more complex example, the well-known issues of the image of classical 
Greek antiquity or of tradition as a determinant of national identity. Srudies 
such as Martin Bernal's Black Athena and Eric Hobsbawm and Terence 
. Ranger's The Invention of Tradition have accenruated the extraordinary in­
lluence oftoday's anxieties and agendas on the pure (even purged) images 
we construct of a privileged, genealogically useful past, a past in which we 
exclude unwanted elements, vestiges, narratives. Thus, according to Bernal, 
whereas Greek civilization was known originally to have roors in Egyptian, 
·semitic, and various other southern and aastern culrures, it was redesigned J6 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
as "Aryan" during the course of the nineteenth cenrury, its Semitic and 
African roots either actively purged or hidden from view. Since Greek 
writers themselves openly acknowledged their culture's hybrid past, Euro­
pean philologists acquired the ideological habit of passing over these embar­
rassing passages without comment, in the interests of Atcic purity. 24 (One 
also recalls that only in the nineteenth century did European historians of 
the Crusades begin not to allude to the practice of cannibalism among the 
Frankish knights, even though eating human flesh is mentioned un­
ashamedly in contemporary Crusader chronicles.) 
No less than the image of Greece, images of European authority were 
buttressed and shaped during the nineteenth century, and where but in the 
manufacture of rituals, ceremonies, and traditions could this be done? This 
is the argument put forward by Hobsb~wm, Ranger, and the other contribu­
tors to The Invention of Tn~dition. At a time when the older filaments and 
organizations that bound pre-modern societies internally were beginning to 
fray, and when the social pressures of administering numerous overseas 
territories and large new domestic constituencies mounted, the ruling elites 
of Europe felt the clear need to project their power backward in time, giving 
it a history and legitimacy that only tradition and longevity could impart. 
Thus in 1876 Victoria was declared Empress of India, her Viceroy Lord 
Lytton was sent there on a visit, greeted and celebrated in "traditional" 
jamborees and durbars all over the country, as well as in a great Imperial 
Assemblage in Delhi, as if her rule was not mainly a matter of power and 
unilateral edict, rather than age-old custom. 25 
Similar constructions have been made on the opposite side, that is, by 
insurgent "natives" about their pre-colonial past, as in the case of Algeria 
during the War oflndependence (19J4-r9li2), when decolonization encour­
aged Algerians and Muslims to create images of what they supposed them­
selves to have been prior to French colonization. This strategy is at work in 
what many national poets or men of letters say and write during indepen­
dence or liberation struggles elsewhere in the colonial world. I want to 
underline the mobilizing power of the images and traditions brought forth, 
and their fictional, or at least romantically colored, fantastic quality. Think 
of what Yeats does for the Irish past, with its Cuchulains and its great houses, 
which give the nationalist struggle something to revive and admire. In 
post-colonial national states, the liabilities of such essences as the Celtic 
spirit, negritude, or Islam are clear: they have much to do not only with the 
native manipulators, who also use them to cover up contemporary faults, 
corruptions, tyrannies, but also with the embattled imperial contexts out of 
which they came and in which they were felt to be necessary. 
Though for the most part the colonies have won their independence, Images of the Past, Pure and Impure 17 
many of the imperial attitudes underlying colonial conquest continue. In 1910 
the French advocate of colonialism Jules Harmand said: 
It is necessary, then, to accept as a principle and point of departure the 
fact that there is a hierarchy of races and civilizations, and that we 
belong to the superior race and civilization, still recognizing that, while 
superiority confers rights, it imposes strict obligations in return. The 
basic legitimation of conquest over native peoples is the conviction of 
our superiority, not merely our mechanical, economic, and military 
superiority, but our moral superiority. Our dignity rests on that quality, 
and it underlies our right to direct the rest of humanity. Material power 
is nothing but a means to that end.~6 
As a precursor of to day's polemics about the superiority of Western civiliza­
tion over others, the supreme value of purely Western humanities as ex­
tolled by conservative philosophers like Allan Bloom, the essential 
inferiority (and threat) of the non-Westerner as claimed by Japan-bashers, 
ideological Orientalists, and critics of"native" regression in Africa and Asia, 
Harmand's declaration has a stunning prescience. 
More imponant thari the past itself, therefore, is its bearing upon cultural 
attitudes in the present. For reasons that are panly embedded in the imperial 
experience, the old divisions between colonizer and colonized have re­
emerged in what is often referred to as the Nonh-South relationship, which 
h~ entailed defensiveness, various kinds of rhetorical and ideological com­
bat, and a simmering hostility that is quite likely to trigger devastating 
wars--in some cases it already has. Are there ways we can reconceive the 
imperial experience in other than companmentalized terms, so as to trans­
form our understanding of both the past and the present and our attitude 
toward the future? 
We n'tust stan by characterizing the commonest ways that people handle 
the tangled, many-sided legacy of imperialism, not just those who left the 
colonies, but also those who were there in the first place and who remained, 
the natives. Many people in England probably feel a cenain remorse or 
regret about their nation's Indian experience, but there are also many people 
who miss the good old days, even though the value of those days, the reason 
they ended, and their own attitudes toward native nationalism are all un­
resolved, still volatile issues. This is especially the case when race relations 
are involved, for instance during the crisis over the publication of Salman 
Rushdie's The Satanic Verses and the subsequent [iii'Wa calling for Rushdie's 
death issued by Ayatollah Khomeini. . 
But, equally, debate in Third World countries about colonialist practice 18 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
arid the imperialist ideology that sustained it is extremely lively and diverse. 
Large groups of people believe that the bitterness and humiliations of the 
experience which virtually enslaved them nevertheless delivered benefits-­
liberal ideas, national self-consciousness, and technological goods--that 
over time seem to have made imperialism much less unpleasant. Other 
people in the post-colonial age retrospectively reflected on colonialism the 
better to understand the difficulties of the present in newly independent 
states. Real problems of democracy, development, and destiny, are attested 
to by the state persecution of intellectuals who carry on their thought and 
practice publicly and cciurageously-Eqbal Ahmad and Faiz Ahmad Faiz 
in Pakistan, Ngugi wa Thiongo in Kenya, or Abdelrahman el Munif in 
-the Arab world-major thinkers and artists whose sufferings have not 
blunted the intransigence of their thought, or inhibited the severity of their 
punishment. 
Neither Munif, Ngugi, nor Faiz, nor any other like them, was anything 
but unstinting in his hatred of implanted colonialism or the imperialism that 
kept it going. Ironically, they were listened to only partially, whether in the 
West or by the ruling authorities in their own societies. They were likely, 
on the one hand, to be considered by many Western intellectuals retrospec­
tive J eremiahs denouncing the evils of a past colonialism, and, on the other, 
to be treated by their governments in Saudi Arabia, Kenya, Pakistan as 
agents of outside powers who deserved imprisonment or exile. The tragedy 
of this experience, and indeed of so many post-colonial experiences, derives 
from the limit~tions of the attempts to deal with relationships that are 
polarized, radically uneven, remembered differently. The spheres, the sites 
of intensity, the agendas, and the constituencies in the metropolitan and 
ex-colonized worlds appear to overlap only partially. The small area that is 
perceived as common does not, at this point, provide for more than what 
might be called a rhetoric of blame. 
I want first to consider the actualities of the intellectual terrains both 
common and discrepant in post-imperial public discourse, especially con­
centrating on what in this discourse gives rise to and encourages the rhetoric 
and politics of blame. Then, using the perspectives and methods of what 
might be called a comparative literature of imperialism, I shall consider the 
ways in which a reconsidered or revised notion of how a post-imperial 
intellectual attitude· might expand the overlapping community between 
metropolitan and formerly colonized societies. By looking at the different 
experiences contrapuntally, as making up a set of what I call intertWined and 
overlapping histories, I shall try to formulate an alternative both to a politics 
of blame and to the even more destructive politics of confrontation and 
hostility. A more interesting type of secular interpretation can emerge, Two Visions in Heart of Darkness 19 
altogether more rewarding than the denunciations of the past, the expres­
sions of regret for its having ended, or--even more wasteful because violent 
and far too easy and attractive--the hostility between Western and non­
Western cultures that leads to crises. The world is too small and interdepen­
dent to let these passively happen. 
( III ) 
Two Visions in Heart of Darkness 
D omination and inequities of power and wealth are perennial facts of 
human society. But in today's global setting they are also interpretable 
as having something to do with 'imperialism, its history, its new forms. The 
nations of contemporary Asia, Latin America, and Africa are politically 
independent but in many ways are as dominated and dependent as they were 
when ruled directly by European powers. On the one hand, this is the 
consequence of self-inflicted wounds, critics like V. S. Naipaul are wont to 
say: they (everyone knows that "they" means coloreds, wogs, niggers) are to 
blame for what "they" are, and it's no use droning on about the legacy of 
imperialism. On the other hand, blaming the Europeans sweepingly for the 
mis(ortunes of the present is not much of an alternative. What we need to 
do is to look at these matters as a network of interdependent histories that 
it would be inaccurate and senseless to repress, useful and interesting to 
understand. 
The point here is not complicated. If while sitting in Oxford, Paris, or 
New York you tell Arabs or Africans that they belong to a basically sick or 
unregenerate culture, you are unlikely to convince them. Even if you prevail 
over them, they are not going to concede to you your essential superiority 
or your right to rule them despite your. evident wealth and power. The 
history of this stand-off is manifest throughout colonies where white masters 
were once unchallenged but finally driven out Conversely, the triumphant 
natives soon enough found that they needed the West and that the idea of 
tottd independence was a nationalist fiction designed mainly for what Fanon 
calls the "nationalist bourgeoisie," who in tum often ran the new countries 
with a callous, exploitative tyranny reminiscent of the departed masters. 
And so in the late twentieth century the imperial cycle of the last century 
in some way replicates itself, although today there are really no big empty 
spaces,' no expanding frontiers, no exciti~g new settlements to establish. we 10 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
live in one global environment with a huge number of ecological, economic, 
social, and political pressures tearing at its only dimly perceived, basically 
uninterpreted and uncomprehended fabric. Anyone with even a vague con­
sciousness of this whole is alarmed at how such remorselessly selfish and 
narrow interests-patriotism, chauvinism, ethnic, religious, and racial ha­
treds-can in fact lead to mass destructiveness. The world simply cannot 
afford this many more times. 
One should not pretend that models for a harmonious world order are 
ready at hand, and it would be equally disingenuous to suppose that ideas 
of peace and community have much of a chance when power is moved to 
action by aggressive perceptions of "vital national interests" or unlimited 
sovereignty. The United States' clash with Iraq and Iraq's aggression against 
Kuwait concerning oil are obvious examples. The wonder of it is that the 
schooling for such relatively provincial thought and action is still prevalent, 
unchecked, uncritically accepted, recurringly replicated in the education of 
generation after generation. We are all taught to venerate our nations and 
admire our traditions: we are taught to pursue their interests with toughness 
and in disregard for other societies. A new and in my opinion appalling 
tribalism is fracturing societies, separating peoples, promoting greed, bloody 
conflict, and uninteresting assertions of minor ethnic or group particularity. 
Little time is spent not so much in "learning about other cultures"-the 
phrase has an inane vagueness to it-but in studying the map of interactions, 
the actual and often productive traffic occurring on a day-by-day, and even 
minute-by-minute basis among states, societies, groups, identities. 
No one can hold this entire map in his or her head, which is why the 
geography of empire and the many-sided imperial experience that created 
its fundamental texture should be considered first in terms of a few salient 
configurations. Primarily, as we look back at the nineteenth century, we see 
that the drive toward empire in effect brought most of the earth under the 
domination of a handful of powers. To get hold of part of what this means, 
I propose to look at a specific set of rich cultural documents in which the 
interaction between Europe or America on the one hand and the imperial­
ized world on the other is animated, informed, made explicit as an experi­
ence for both sides of the encounter. Yet before I do this, historically and 
systematically, it is a useful preparation to look at what still remains of 
imperialism in recent cultural discussion. This is the residuum of a dense, 
interesting history that is paradoxically global and local at the same time, 
and it is also a sign of how the imperial past lives on, arousing argument and 
counter-argument with surprising intensity. Because they are contemporary 
and easy at hand, these traces of the past in the present point the way to a 
study Qf the historie~the plural is used advisedly-created by empire, not Two Vition.r in Heart of Darkness 21 
just the stories of the white man and woman, but also those of the non-whites 
whose lands and very being were at issue, even as their claims were denied 
or ignored. 
One significant contemporary debate about the residue of imperialism­
the matter of how "natives" are represented in the Western media-illus­
trates the persistence of such interdependence and overlapping, not only in 
the debate's content but in its form, not only in what is said but also in how 
it is said, by whom, where, and for whom. This bears looking into, although 
it requiies a self-discipline not easily come by, so well-developed, tempting, 
and ready at hand are the confrontational strategies. In 1984, well before The 
Satanic Verses appeared, Salman Rushdie diagnosed the spate of films and 
articles about the British Raj, including the television series The Jewel in the 
Crown and David Lean's film of A Patsage to India. Rushdie noted that the 
nostalgia pressed into service by these affectionate recollections of British 
rule in India coincided with the Falklands War, and that "the rise of Raj 
revisionism, exemplified by the huge success of these fictions, is the artistic 
counterpart to the rise of conservative ideologies in modern Britain." Com­
mentators responded to what they considered Rushdie's wailing and whin­
ing in public and. seemed to disregard his principal point. Rushdie was trying 
to make a larger argument, which presumably should have appealed to 
intellectuals for whom George Orwell's well-known description of the intel­
lectual's place in society as being inside and outside the whale no longer 
applied; modern reality in Rushdie's terms was actually "whaleless, this 
W(:>rld without quiet corners [in which] there can be no easy escapes from 
history, from hullabaloo, from terrible, unquiet fuss."27 But Rushdie's main 
point was not the point considered worth taking up and debating. Instead the 
main issue for contention was whether things in the Third World hadn't in 
fact declined after the colonies had been emancipated, and whether it might 
not be better on the whole to listen to the rare-luckily, I might add, 
extremely rare-Third World intellectuals who manfully ascribed most of 
their present barbarities, tyrannies, and degradations to their own native 
histories, histories that were pretty bad before colonialism and that reverted 
to that state after colonialism. Hence, ran this argument, better a ruthlessly 
honest V. S. Naipaul than an absurdly posturing Rushdie. 
, One could conclude from the emotions stirred up by Rushdie's own case, 
then and later, that many people in the West came to feel that enough was 
enough. After, Vietnam and Iran-and note here that these labels are usually 
employed equally,to evoke American domestic traumas (the student insur­
rections of the 196os, the public anguish about the hostages in the 197os) as 
much as international conflict and the "loss" of Vietnam and Iran to radical 
nationalisms-after Vietnam and Iran, lines had to be defended. Western 22 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
democracy had taken a beating, and even if the physical damage had been 
done abroad, there was a sense, as Jimmy Caner once rather oddly put it, 
of "mutual destruction." This feeling in turn led to Westerners rethinking 
the whole process of decolonization. Was it not true, ran their new evalua­
tion, that "we" had given "them" progress and modernization? Hadn't we 
provided them with order and a kind of stability that they haven't been able 
since to provide for themselves? Wasn't it an atrocious misplaced trust to 
believe in their capacity for independence, for it had led to Bokassas and 
Amins, whose intellectual correlates were people like Rushdie? Shouldn't 
we have held on to the colonies, kept the subject or inferior races in check, 
remained true to our civilizational responsibilities? 
I realize that what I have just reproduced is not entirely the thing itself, 
but perhaps a caricature. Nevenheless it bears an uncomfortable resem­
blance to what many people who imagined themselves speaking for the 
West said. There seemed little skepticism that a monolithic "West" in fact 
existed, any more than an entire ex-colonial world described in one sweep­
ing generalization after another. The leap to essences and generalizations 
was accompanied by appeals to an imagined history ofWestern endowments 
and free hand-outs, followed by a reprehensible sequence of ungrateful 
bitings of that grandly giving "Western" hand. "Why don't they appreciate 
us, after what we did for them?" 28 
How easily so much could be compressed into that simple formula of 
unappreciated magnanimity! Dismissed or forgotten were the ravaged colo­
nial peoples who for centtiries endured summary justice, unending eco­
nomic oppression, distortion of their social and intimate lives, and a 
recourseless submission that was the function of unchanging European supe­
riority. Only to keep in mind the millions of Africans who were supplied to 
the slave trade is to acknowledge the unimaginable cost of maintaining that 
superiority. Yet dismissed most often are precisely the infinite number of 
traces in the immensely detailed, violent history of colonial intervention­
minute by minute, hour by hour-in the lives of individuals and collectivi­
ties, on both sides of the colonial divide. 
The thing to be noticed about this kind of contemporary discourse, which 
assumes the primacy and even the complete centrality of the West, is how 
totalizing is its form, how all-enveloping its attitudes and gestures, how 
much it shuts out even as it includes, compresses, and consolidates. We 
suddenly find ourselves transponed backward in time to the late nineteenth 
century. 
This imperial attitude is, I believe, beautifully captured in the compli­
cated and rich narrative form of Conrad's great novella Heart of Darkness, 
written between 1898 and 1899. On the one hand, the narrator Marlow Two Visions in Heart of Darkness 
acknowledges the tragic predicament of all speech-that "it is impossible to 
convey the life-sensation of any given epoch of one's existence--that which 
makes its truth, its meaning--its subtle and penetrating essence .... We live, 
as we dream-alone" 29-yet still manages to convey the enormous power 
of Kurtz's African experience through his own overmastering narrative of his 
voyage into the African interior toward Kurtz. This narrative in turn is 
connected directly with the redemptive force, as well as the waste and 
horror, of Europe's mission in the dark world. Whatever is lost or elided or 
even simply made up in Marlow's immensely compelling recitation is com­
pensated for in the narrative's sheer historical momentum, the temporal 
forward movement-with digressions, descriptions, exciting encounters, 
and all. Within the narrative of how he journeyed to Kurtz's Inner Station, 
whose source and authority he now becomes, Marlow moves backward and 
forward materially in small and large spirals, very much the way episodes 
in the course of his journey up-river are then incorporated by the principal 
forward trajectory into what he renders as "the heart of Africa." 
Thus Marlow's encounter with the improbably white-suited clerk in the 
middle of the jungle furnishes him with several digressive paragraphs, as 
does his meeting later with the semi-crazed, harlequin-like Russian who has 
been so affected by Kurtz's gifts. Yet underlying Marlow's inconclusiveness, 
his evasions, his arabesque meditations on his feelings and ideas, is the 
unrelenting course of the journey itself, which, despite all the many obsta­
cles, is sustained through the jungle, through time, through hardship, to the 
heaq of it all, Kurtz's ivory-trading empire. Conrad wants us to see how 
Kurtz's great looting adventure, Marlow's journey up the river, and the 
narrative itself all share a common theme: Europeans performing acts of 
impedal mastery and will in (or about) Africa. , 
What makes Conrad different from the other colonial writers who were 
his contemporaries is that, for reasons having partly to do with the colonial­
ism that turned him, a Polish expatriate, into an employee of the imperial 
system, he was so self-conscious about what he did. Like most of his Clther 
tales, therefore, Heart of Darkneu cannot just be a straightforward recital of 
Marlow's adventures: it is also a dramatization of Marlow himself, the 
former wanderer in colonial regions, telling his story to a group of British 
listeners at a particular time and in a specific place. That this group of people 
. is drawn largely from the business world is Conrad's way of emphasizing the 
fact that during the 189os the busines~ of empire, once an adventurous and 
often individualistic enterprise, had become the empire of business. (Coinci­
dentally we should note that at about the same time Halford Mackinder, an 
explorer, geographer, and Liberal Imperialist, gave a series of lectures on 
imperialism at the London Institute of Bankers: 30 perhaps Conrad knew OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
about this.) Although the almost oppressive force of Marlow's narrative 
leaves us wid). a quite ~ccurate sense that there is no way out of the sovereign 
historical force of imperialism, and that it has the power of a system repre­
senting as well as speaking for everything within its dominion, Conrad 
shows us that what Marlow does is contingent, acted out for a set of 
like-minded British hearers, and limited to that situation. 
Yet neither Conrad nor Marlow gives us a full view of what is outside the 
world-conquering attitudes embodied by Kurtz, Marlow, the circle oflisten­
ers on the deck of the Nellie, and Conrad. By that I mean that Heart ofDarknm 
works so effectively because its politics and aesthetics are, so to speak, 
imperialist, which in the closing years of the nineteenth century seemed to 
be at the same time an aesthetic, politics, and even epistemology inevitable 
and unavoidable. For if we cannot truly understand someone else's experi­
ence and if we must therefore depend upon the assertive authority of the son 
of power that Kurtz wields as a white man in the jungle or that Marlow, 
another white man, wields as narrator, there is no use looking for other, 
non-imperialist alternatives; the system has simply eliminated them and 
made them unthinkable. The circularity, the perfect closure of the whole 
thing is not only aesthetically but also mentally unassailable. 
Conrad is so self-conscious about situating Marlow's tale in a narrative 
moment that he allows us simultaneously to realize after all that imperial­
ism, far from swallowing up its own history, was taking place in and was 
circumscribed by a larger history, one just outside the tightly inclusive circle 
of Europeans on the deck of the Nellie. As yet, however, no one seemed to 
inhabit that region, and so Conrad left it empty.! 
Conrad could p~obably never have used Marlow to present anything 
other than an imperialist world-view, given what was available for either 
Conrad or Marlow to see of the non-European at the time. Independence 
was for whites and Europeans; the lesser or subject peoples were to be ruled; 
science, learning, history emanated from the West. True, Conrad scrupu­
lously recorded the differences between the disgraces of Belgian and British 
colonial attitudes, but he could only imagine the world carved up into one 
or another Western sphere of dominion. But because Conrad also had an 
extraordinarily persistent residual sense of his own exilic marginality, he 
quite carefully (some would say maddeningly) qualified Marlow's narrative 
with the provisionality that came from standing at the very juncture of this 
world with another, unspecified but different. Conrad was certainly not a 
great imperialist entrepreneur like Cecil Rhodes or Frederick Lugard, even 
though he understood perfectly how for each of them, in Hannah Arendt's 
words, ~o enter "the maelstrom of an unending process of expansion, he will, 
as it were, cease to be what he was and obey the laws of the process, identify Two Visions in Heart of Darkness 2J 
himself with anonymous forces that he is supposed to serve in order to keep 
the whole process in motion, he will think of himself as mere function, and 
eventually consider such functionality, such an incarnation of the dynamic 
trend,' his highest possible achievement." 31 Conrad's realization is that if, like 
narrative, imperialism has monopolized the entire system of representa­
tion-which in the case of Heart of Darkness allowed it to speak for Africans 
as well as for Kurtz and the other adventurers, including Marlow and his 
audience-your self-consciousness as an outsider can allow you actively to 
comprehend how the machine works, given that you and it are fundamen­
tally not in perfect synchrony or correspondence. Never the wholly incor­
porated and fully acculturated Englishman, Conrad therefore preserved an 
ironic distance in each of his works. 
The form of Conrad's narrative has thus made it possible to derive two 
possible arguments, two visions, in die post-colonial world that succeeded 
his. One argument allows the old imperial enterprise full scope to play itself 
out conventionally, to render the world as official European or Western 
imperialism saw it, and to consolidate itself after World War Two. Western­
ers may have physically left their old colonies in Africa and Asia, but they 
retained them not only as markets but as locales on the ideological map over 
which they continued to rule morally and intellectually. "Show me the Zulu 
Tolstoy," as one American intellectual has recently put it. The asserriv~ 
sovereign inclusiveness of this argument courses through the words of those 
who speak today for the West and for what the West did, as well as for what 
the ,rest of the world is, was, and may be. The assenions of this discourse 
exclude what has been represented as "lost" by arguing that the colonial 
world was in some ways ontologically speaking lost to begin with, irredeem­
able, irrecusably inferior. Moreover, it focusses not on what was shared in 
the colonial experience, but on what must never be shared, namely the 
authority and rectitude that come with greater power and development. 
Rhetorically, its terms are the organization of political passions, to borrow 
from Julien Benda's critique of modern intellectuals, terms which, he was 
sensible enough to know, lead inevitably to mass slaughter, and if not to 
literal mass slaughter then certainly to rhetorical slaughter. 
· The second argument is considerably less objectionable. It sees itself as 
Conrad saw his own narratives, local to a time and place, neither uncondi-
. rionally true .nor unqualifiedly certain. As I have said, Conrad does not give 
us the sense that he could imagine a fully realized alternative to imperialism: 
the natives he wrote about in Africa, Asia, or America were incapable of 
independence, and because he seemed to imagine that "European tutelage 
was a given, he could not foresee what would take place when it came to an 
end. But come to an end it would, if only because-like all human e.ffon, like 26 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
speech itself-it would have its moment, then it would have to pass. Since 
Conrad dates imperialism, shows its contingency, records its illusions and 
tremendous violence and waste (as in Nostromo.), he permits his later readers 
to imagine something other than an Africa carved up into dozens of Euro­
pean colonies, even if, for his own part, he had little notion of what that 
Africa might be. 
To return to the first line out of Conrad, the discourse of resurgent empire 
proves that the nineteenth-century imperial encounter continues today to 
'draw lines and defend barriers. Strangely, it persists alsO in the enormously 
complex and quietly interesting interchange between former colonial part­
ners, say between Britain and India, or between France and the Francophone 
countries of Africa. But these exchanges te~ to be overshadowed by the 
loud antagonisms of the polarized debate of pro-and anti-imperialists, who 
speak stridently of national destiny, overseas interests, neo-imperialism, and 
the like, drawing like-minded people--aggressive Westerners and, ironi­
cally, those non-Westerners for whom the new nationalist and resurgent 
Ayatollahs speak-away from the other ongoing interchange. Inside each 
regrettably constricted camp stand the blameless, the just, the faithful, led by 
the omnicompetent, those who know the truth about themselves.and others; 
outside stands a miscellaneous bunch of querulous intellectuals and wishy­
. washy skeptics who go on complaining about the past to little effect. 
An important ideological shift occurred during the 197os and 198os, accom­
panying this contraction of horizons in what I have been calling the first of 
the two lines leading out of Heart of Darkness. One can locate it, for instance, 
in the dramatic change in emphasis and, quite literally, direction among 
thinkers noted for their radicalism. The later Jean-Fran~ois Lyotard and 
Michel Foucault, eminent French philosophers who emerged during the 
196os as apostles of radicalism and intellectual insurgency, describe a striking 
new lack of faith in what Lyotard calls the great legitimizing narratives of 
emancipation and enlightenment. Our age, he said in the 198os, is post­
modernist, concerned only with local issues, not with history but with 
problems to be solved, not with a grand reality but with games. 3z Foucault 
also turned his attention away from the oppositional forces in modem 
society which he had studied for their undeterred resistance to exclusion and 
confinement--delinquents, poetS, outcasts, and the like--and decided that 
since power was everywhere it was probably better co concentrate on the 
local micro-physics of power that surround the individual. The self was 
therefore to be studied, cultivated, and, if necessary, refashioned and con­
stituted.33 In both Lyotard and Foucault we find precisely the same trope 
employed to explain the disappointment in the politics of liberation: narra­
tive, which posits an enabling beginning point and a vindicating goal, is no Two Visions in Heart of Darkness 
longer adequate for plotting the human trajectory in society. There is 
nothing to look forward to: we are stuck within our circle. And now the line 
is enclosed by a circle. After years of support for anti-colonial struggles in 
Algeria, Cuba, Viemam, Palestine, Iran, which came to represent for many 
Western intellectuals their deepest engagement in the politics and philoso­
phy of anti-imperialist decolonization, a moment·of exhaustion and disap­
pointment was reached. 34 One began to hear and read how futile it was to 
support revolutions, how barbaric were the new regimes that came to power, 
how-thi~ is an extreme case--decolonization had benefitted "world 
communism." 
Enter now terrorism and barbarism. Enter also the ex-colonial experts 
whose well-publicized message was these colonial peoples deserve only 
colonialism or, since "we" were foolish to pull out of Aden, Algeria, India, 
Indochina, and everywhere else, it might be a good idea to reinvade their 
territories. Enter also various experts and theoreticians of the relationship 
between liberation movements, terrorism, and.the KGB. There was a resur­
gence of sympathy for what Jeane Kirkpatrick called authoritarian (as op­
posed to totalitarian) regimes who were Western allies. With the onset of 
Reaganism, Thatcherism, and their correlates, a new phase of history began. 
However else it. might have been historically understandable, peremp­
torily withdrawing "the West" from its own experiences in the "peripheral 
world" certainly was and is not an attractive or edifying activity for an 
intellectual today. It shuts out the possibility of knowledge and of discovery 
of what it means to be outside the whale. Let us return to Rushdie for 
another insight: 
We see that it can be as false to create a politics-free fictional universe 
as to create one in which nobody needs to work or eat or hate or love 
or sleep. Outside the whale it becomes necessary, and even exhilarat­
ing, to grapple with the special problems created by the incorporation 
of political material, because politics is by turns farce and tragedy, and 
sometimes (e.g., Zia's Pakistan) both at once. Outside the whale the 
writer is obliged to accept that he (or she) is part of the crowd, part of 
the ocean, part of the storm, so that objectivity becomes a great dream, 
like perfection, an unattainable goal for which one must struggle in 
spite of the impossibility of success. Outside the whale is the world of 
Samuel Beckett's famous formula: I can't go on, I'll go on.35 
The terms ofRushdie's description, while they borrow from Orwell, seem 
to me ttl resonate even more interestingly with Conrad. For here is the 
second consequence, the second line leading out of Conrad's narrative form; OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
in its explicit references to the outside, it points to a perspective outside the 
basically imperialist representations provided by Marlow and his listeners. 
It is a profoundly secular perspective, and it is beholden neither to notions 
about historical destiny and the essentialism that destiny always seems to 
entail, nor to historical indifference and resignation. Being on the inside 
shuts out the full experience of imperialism, edits it and subordinates it to 
the dominance of one Eurocentric and totalizing view; this other perspective 
suggests the presence of a field without special historical privileges for one 
party. 
I don't want to overinterpret Rushdie, or put ideas in his prose that he 
may not have intended. In this controversy with the local British media 
(before The Satanic Verses sent him into hiding), he claimed that he could not 
recognize the truth of his own experience in the popular media repres~nta­
tions of India. Now I myself would go further and say that it is one of the 
virtues of such conjunctures of politics with culture and aesthetics that they 
permit the disclosure of a common ground obscured by the controversy 
itsel£ Perhaps it is especially hard for the combatants directly involved to 
see this common ground when they are fighting back more than reflecting. 
I can perfectly understand the anger that fuelled Rushdie's argument be­
cause like hi:m I feel oumumbered and outorganized by a prevailing Western 
consensus that has come to regard the Third World as an atrocious nuisance, 
a culturally and politically inferior place. Whereas we write and speak as 
members of a small minority of marginal voices, our journalistic and aca­
demic critics belong to a wealthy system of interlocking informational and 
academic resources with newspapers, television networks, journals of opin­
ion, and institutes at its disposal. Most ofthem.have now taken up a strident 
chorus of rightward-tending damnation, in which they separate what is 
non-white, non-Western, and non-Judeo-Christian from the acceptable and 
designated Western ethos, then herd it all together under various demeaning 
rubrics such as terrorist, marginal, second-rate, or unimportant. T.o attack 
what is contained in these categories is to defend the Western spirit. 
Let us return to Conrad and to what I have been referring to as the 
second, less imperialistically assertive possibility offered by HeartofDarkness. 
Recall once again that Conrad sets the story on the deck of a boat anchored 
in the Thames; as Marlow tells his story the sun sets, and by the end of the 
narrative the heart of darkness has reappeared in England; outside the group 
of Marlow's listeners lies an undefined and unclear world. Conrad some­
times seems to want to fold that world into the imperial metropolitan 
discourse represented by Marlow, but by virtue ofhis own dislocated subjec­
tivity he resists the effort and succeeds in so doing, I have always believed, 
largely through formal devices. Conrad's self-consciously circular narrative Two Visiont in Heart of Darkness 
forms draw attention to themselves as artificial constructions, encouraging 
us to sense the potential of a reality that seemed inaccessible to imperialism, 
just beyond its control, and that only well after Conrad's death in 192.4 
acquired a substantial presence. 
This needs more explanation. Despite their European names and manner­
isms, Conrad's narrators are not average unreflecting witnesses of European 
imperialism. They do not simply accept what goes on in the name of the 
imperial idea: they think about it a lot, they worry about it, they are actually 
quite anxious about whether they can make it seem like a routine thing. But 
it never is. Conrad's way of demonstrating this discrepancy between the 
orthodox and his own views of empire is to keep drawing attention to how 
ideas and values are constructed (and deconstructed) thr~>Ugh dislocations in 
the narrator's language. In addition, the recitations are meticulously staged: 
the narrator is a speaker whose audience and the reason for their being 
together, the quality of whose voice, the effect of what he says-are all 
important and even insistent aspects of the story he tells. Marlow, for 
example, is never straightforward. He alternates between garrulity and stun­
ning eloquence, and rarely resists making peculiar things seem more pecu­
liar by surprisingly misstating them, or rendering them vague and 
contradictory. Thus, he says, a French warship fires "into a continent"; 
Kurtz's eloquence is enlightening as well as fraudulent; and so on-his 
speech so full of these odd discrepancies (well discussed by Ian Watt as 
"delayed decoding" 36) that the net effect is to leave his immediate audience 
as well as the reader with the acute sense that what he is presenting is not 
quite as it should be or appears to be. 
Yet the whole point of what Kurtz and Marlow talk about is in fact 
imperial mastery, white European over black Africans, and their ivory, civili­
zation over the primitive dark continent. By accentuating the discrepancy 
between the official "idea" of empire and the remarkably disorienting actual­
ity of Africa, Marlow unsettles the reader's sense not only of the very· idea 
of empire, but of something more basic, reality itself. For if Conrad can show 
that all human activity depends on controlling a radically unstable reality to 
which words approximate only by will or convention, the same is true of 
empire, of venerating the idea, and so forth. With Conrad, then, we are in 
a world being made and unmade more or less all the time. What appears 
stable and secure--the policeman at the corner, ·for instance--is only 
slightly more secure than the white men in the jungle, and requires the same 
continuous' (but precarious) triumph over an all-pervading darkness, which 
by "the end of the tale is shown to be the same in London and in Africa. 
Conrad's genius allowed him to realize that the ever-present darkness 
could be colonized or illuminated-Heart of Darkness is full of references to OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
the mis.rion civiiisatrice, to benevolent as well as cruel schemes to bring light 
to the dark places and peoples of this world by acts of will and deployments 
of power--but that it also had to be acknowledged as independent. Kurtz 
and Marlow acknowledge the darkness, the former as he is dying, the latter 
as he reflects retrospectively on the meaning of Kurtz's final words. They 
(and of course Conrad) are ahead of their rime in understanding that what 
they call "the darkness" has an autonomy of its own, and can rein vade and 
reclaim what imperialism had taken for its own. But Marlow and Kurtz are 
also creatures of their time and cannot take the next step, which would be 
to recognize that what they saw, disablingly and disparagingly, as a non­
European "darkness" was in fact a non-European world re.risting imperialism 
so as one day to regain sovereignty and independence, and not, as Conrad 
reductively says, to reestablish the darkness. Conrad's tragic limitation is 
that even though he could see dearly thai: on one level imperialism was 
essentially pure dominance and land-grabbing, he could not then conclude 
that imperialism had to end so that "natives" could lead lives free from 
European domination. As a creature of his time, Conrad could not grant the 
natives their freedom, despite his severe critique of the imperialism that 
enslaved them. 
The cultural and ideological evidence that Conrad was wrong in his 
Eurocentric way is both impressive and rich. A whole movement, literature, 
and theory of resistance and response to empire exists--it is the subject of 
Chapter Three of this book-and in greatly disparate post-colonial regions 
one sees tremendously energetic efforts to engage with the metropolitan 
world in equal debate so as to testify to the diversity and differences of the 
non-European world and to its own agendas, priorities, and history. The 
purpose of this testimony is to inscribe, reinterpret, and expand the areas of 
engagement as well as the terrain contested with Europe. Some of this 
activity-for example, the work of two important and active Iranian intel­
lectuals, Ali Shariati and Jalal Ali i-Ahmed, who by means of speeches, 
books, tapes, and pamphlets prepared the way for the Islami.c Revolution­
interprets colonialism by asserting the absolute opposition of the native 
culture: the West is an enemy, a disease, an evil. In other instances, novelists 
like the Kenyan Ngugi and the Sudanese Tayeb Salih appropriate for their 
fiction· such great topoi of colonial culture as the quest and the voyage into 
the unknown, claiming them for their own, post-colonial purposes. Salih's· 
hero in Sea.ron of Migration to the North does {and is) the reverse of what Kurtz 
does {and is): the Black man journeys north into white territory. 
Between classical nineteenth-century imperialism and what it gave rise to 
in resistant native cultures, there is thus both a stubborn confrontation and 
a crossing over in discussion, borrowing back and forth, debate. Many of the Discrepant Experiences 
most interesting post-colonial writers bear their past within tlaem-as scars 
of humiliating wounds, as instigation for different practices, as potentially 
revised visions of the past tending toward a new future, as urgently reinter­
pretable and redeployable experiences, in which the formerly silent native 
speaks and acts on territory taken back from the empire. One sees these 
aspects in Rushdie, Derek Walcott, Aime Cesaire, Chinua Achebe, Pablo 
Neruda, and Brian Friel. And now these writers can truly read the great 
colonial masterpieces, which not only misrepresented them but assumed 
they were :unable to read and respond directly to what had been written 
about them, just as European ethnography presumed the natives' incapacity 
to intervene in scientific discourse about them. Let us try now to review this 
new situation more fully. 
( IV ) 
Ditcrepant ExperienceS' 
L et us begin by accepting the notion that although there is an irreduci­
ble subjective core to human experience, this experience is also histori­
cal and secular, it is accessible to analysis and interpretation, and-centrally 
important-it is not exhausted by totalizing theories, not marked and lim­
ited by doctrinal or national lines, not confined once and for all to analytical 
constructs. If one believes with Gramsci that an intellectual vocation is 
socially possible as well as desirable, then it is an inadmissible contradiction 
at the same time to build analyses of historical experience around exclusions, 
exclusions that stipulate, for instance, that only women can understand 
feminine experience, only Jews can understand Jewish suffering, only for­
merly colonial subjects can understand colonial experience .. 
I do not !llean what people mean when they say glibly that there are two 
sides to every question. The difficulty with theories of essentialism and 
exclusiveness, or with barriers and sides, is that they give rise to polariza­
tions that absolve and forgive ignorance and demagogy more than they 
~:;nable knowledge. Even the most cursory look at the recent fortunes of 
theories ab<;~ut race, the modern state, modern nationalism itself verifies this 
sad truth. If you know in advance that the African or Iranian or Chinese or 
Jewish or German experience is fundamentally integral, coherent, separate, 
and therefore comprehensible only to Africans, Iranians, Chinese, Jews, or 
Germans, you first of all posit as essential something which, I believe, is both OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
historically created and the result of interpretation-namely the existe!lce 
of Africanness, Jewishness, or Germanness, or for that matter Orientalism 
and Occidentalism. And second, you are likely as a consequence to defend 
the essence or experience itself rather than promote full knowledge of it and 
its entanglements and dependencies on other knowledges. As a result, you 
will demote the different experience of others to' a lesser status. 
If at the outset we acknowledge the massively knotted and complex 
histories of special but nevenheless overlapping and interconnected experi­
ences--of women, of Westerners, of Blacks, of national states and cultures-­
there is no panicular intellectual reason for granting each and all of them 
an ideal and essentially separate status. Yet we would wish to preserve what 
is unique about each so long as we also preserve some sense of the human 
community and the actual contests that contribute to its formation, and of 
which they are all a part. An excellent example of this approach is one I have 
already referred to, the essays in The Invention of Tradition, essays which 
consider invented traditions that are highly specialized and local (e.g., Indian 
durbars and European football games) yet, even though they are very 
different, share similar characteristics. The point of the book is that these 
quite various practices can be read and understood together since they 
belong to comparable fields of human experience, those Hobsbawm de­
scribes as attempting "to establish continuity with a suitable historic past."J 7 
A comparative or, better, a contrapuntal perspective is required in order 
to see a connection betWeen coronation rituals in England and the Indian 
durbars of the late nineteenth century. That is, we must be able to think 
through and interpret together experiences that are discrepant, each with its 
panicular agenda and pace of development, its own internal formations, its 
internal coherence and system of external relationships, all of them co­
existing and interacting with others. Kipling's novel Kim, for example, occu­
pies a very special place in the development of the English novel and in late 
Victorian society, but its picture of India exists in a deeply antithetical 
relationship with the development of the movement for Indian indepen­
dence. Either the novel or the political movement represented or inter­
preted without the other misses the crucial discrepancy between the two 
given to them by the actual experience of empire. 
One point needs further clarification. The notion of "discrepant experi­
ences" is not intended to circumvent the problem of ideology. On the 
contrary, no experience that is interpreted or reflected on can be character­
ized as immediate, just as no critic or interpreter can be entirely believed if 
he or she claims to have achieved an Archimedean perspective that is subject 
neither to history nor to a social setting. In juxtaposing experiences with 
each other, in letting them play off each other, it is my interpretative Discrepant Expen'ences 33 
political aim (in the broadest sense) to make concurrent those views and 
experiences that are ideologically and culturally closed to each other and 
that attempt to distance or suppress other views and experiences. Far from 
seeking to reduce the significance of ideology, the exposure and dramatiza­
tion of discrepancy highlights its cultural' importance; this enables us· to 
appreciate its power and understand its continuing influence. 
So let us contrast two roughly contemporary early-nineteenth-century 
texts (both date from the 181os): the Description de I'Et:Jpfe in all its massive, 
impressive coherence, and a comparatively slender volume, 'Abd al-Rahman 
al-Jabarti's 'Aja'ib ai-Athar. The Description was the twenty-four-volume ac­
count of Nap~leon's expedition to Egypt, produced by the team of French 
scientists which he took with him. 'Abd al-Rahman al-Jal]arti was an Egyp­
tian notable and 'aJim, or religious leader, who witnessed and lived through 
the French expedition. Take first the following passage from the general 
introduction to the Description written by Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Fourier: 
Placed between Africa and Asia, and communicating easily with 
Europe, Egypt occupies the center of the ancient continent This coun­
try presents only great memories; it is the homeland of the arts and 
conserves innumerable monuments; its principal temples and the pal­
aces inhabited by its kings still exist, even though its least ancient 
edifices had already been built by the time of the Trojan War. Homer, 
Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, and Plato all went to Egypt to study the 
sciences, religion, and the laws. Alexander founded an opulent city 
there, which for a long time enjoyed commercial supremacy and which 
witnessed Pompey, Caesar, Mark Antony, and Augustus deciding be­
tween them the fate of Rome and that of the entire world. It is therefore 
proper for this country to attract the attention of illustrious princes who 
rule the destiny of nations. 
No considerable power was ever amassed by any nation, whether in 
the West or in Asia, that did not also turn that nation toward Egypt, 
which was regarded in some measure as its natural lot 38 
Fourier speaks as the rationalizing mouthpiece ofNapoleon's invasion of 
Egypt in 1798. The resonances of the great names he summons, the placing, 
the grounding, the normalizing of foreign conquest within the cultural orbit 
of European existence--all this transforms conquest from a clash between 
a conquering and a defeated army into a much longer, slower process, 
obviously more acceptable to the European sensibility enfolded within its 
own cultural assumptions than the shattering experience could have been 
for an Egyptian who endured the conquest 34 . OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
At almost the same time Jabarti records in his book a series of anguished 
and perceptive rell.ections on the conquest; he writes as an embattled reli­
gious notable recording the invasion of his country and the destruction of 
his society. 
This year is the beginning of a period marked by great battles; serious 
results were suddenly produced in a frightening manner; miseries mul­
tiplied without end, the course of things was troubled, the common 
meaning of life was corrupted and destruction overtook it and the 
devastation was general. [Then, as a good Muslim, he turns back to 
reflect on himself and his people.] "God," says the Koran (xi, 9) "does 
not unjusdy ruin cities whose inhabitants are just."39 
The French expedition was accompanied by a whole team· of scientists 
whose job it was to survey Egypt as it had never been surveyed before--the 
result was the gigantic Description itself-butjabarti has eyes for, and only 
appreciates, the facts of power, whose meaning he senses as constituting a 
punishment for. Egypt French. power. bears upon his existence as a con­
quered Egyptian, an existence for him compressed into that of a subjugated 
particle, barely able to do more than record the French army's comings and 
goings, its imperious decrees, its overwhelmingly harsh measures, its awe­
some and seemingly unchecked ability to do what it wants according to 
imperatives that Jabarti's compatriots could not affect The discrepancy 
between the politics producing the Description and that ofJ abarti's immediate 
response is stark, and highlights the terrain they contest so unequally. 
Now it is not" difficult to follow out the results of Jabarti's attitude, and 
·generations of historians have in fact done this, as I shall do to some extent 
later in this book. His experience produced a deep-seated anti-Westernism 
that is a persistent theme of Egyptian, Arab, Islamic, and Third World 
history; one can also find in J abarti the seeds of Islamic reformism which, as 
promulgated later by the great Azhar cleric and reformer Muhammad 'Abdu 
and his remarkable contemporary Jamal ai-Din ai-Afghani, argued either. 
that Islam had better modernize in order to compete with the West, or that 
it should return to its Meccan roots the better to combat the West; in 
addition, J abarti speaks at an early moment in the history of the immense 
wave of national self-consciousness that culminated in Egyptian indepen­
dence, in Nasserite theory and practice, and in contemporary movements of 
so-called Islamic fundamentalism. 
Nevertheless historians have not so readily read the development of 
French culture and history in terms of Napoleon's Egyptian expedition. 
(The same is true of the British reign in India, a reign of such immense range Dircrepant Experiencer 35 
and wealth as to have become a fact of nature for members of the imperial 
culture.) Yet what later scholars and critics say about the European texts 
literally made possible by the De.rfription's consolidation of the conquest of 
the Orient is also, interestingly, a somewhat attenuated and highly implicit 
function of that earlier contest. To write today about Nerval and Flauben, 
whose work depended so massively upon the Orient, is to work in territory 
originally charted by the French imperial victory, to follow in its steps, and 
to extend them into 150 years of European experience, although in saying 
this one once again highlights the symbolic discrepancy betweenJabani and 
Fourier. The imperial conquest was not a one-time tearing of the veil, but 
a continually repeated, institutionalized presence in French life, where the 
response to the silent and incorporated disparity between French and subju­
gated cultures took on a variety of forms. 
The asymmetry is striking. In one instance, we assume that the better pan 
of history in colonial territories was a function of the imperial intervention; 
in the other, there is an equally obstinate assumption that colonial undertak­
ings were marginal and perhaps even eccentric to the central activities of the 
great metropolitan cultures. Thus, the tendency in anthropology, history, 
and cultural studies in Europe and the United States is tO treat the whole 
of world history as viewable by a kind of Western super-subject, whose 
historicizing and disciplinary rigor either takes away or, in the post-colonial 
period, restores history to people and cultures "without" history. Few full­
scale critical studies have focussed on the relationship between modern 
Western imperialism and its culture, the occlusion of that deeply symbiotic 
relationship being a result of the relationship itsel£ More particularly, the 
extrao~dinary formal and ideological dependence of the great French and 
English realistic novels on the facts of empire has also never been studied 
from a general theoretical standpoint. These elisions and denials are all 
reproduced, I believe, in the strident journalistic debates about decoloniza­
tion, in which imperialism is repeatedly on record as saying, in effect, You 
are what you are because of us; when we left, you reverted to your deplor­
able state; know that or you will know nothing, for certainly there is little 
to be known about imperialism that might help either you or us in the 
present. 
Were the disputed value of knowledge about imperialism merely a con­
troversy about methodology or academic perspectives in cultural history, we 
would be justified in regarding it as not really serious, though perhaps worth 
notice. In fact, however, we are talking about a compellingly important and 
interesting configuration in the world of power and nations. There is no 
question, for example, that in ~e past decade the extraordinarily intense 
reversion to tribal and religious sentiments all over the world has accompa-OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
nied and deepened many of the discrepancies among polities that have 
continued since-if they were not actually created by-the period of high 
European imperialism. Moreover, the various struggles for dominance 
among states, nationalisms, ethnic groups, regions, and cultural entities have· 
conducted and amplified a manipulation of opinion and discourse, a produc­
tion and consumption of ideological media representations, a simplification 
and reduction of vast complexities into easy currency, the easier to deploy 
and exploit them in the interest of state policies. In all of this intellectuals 
have played an important role, nowhere in my opinion more crucial and 
more compromised than in the overlapping region of experience and culture 
that is colonialism's legacy where the politics of secular interpretation is 
carried on for very high stakes. Naturally the preponderance of power has 
been on the side of the self-constituted "Western" societies and the public 
intellectuals who serve as their apologists and ideologists. 
But there have been interesting responses to this imbalance in many 
furmerly colonized states. Recent work on India 11.nd Pakistan in particular 
(e.g., Subaltern Studies) has highlighted the complicities between the post­
colonial security state and the intellectual nationalist elite; Arab, African, 
and Latin American oppositional intellectuals have produced similar critical 
studies. But I shall focus ·here more closely on the unfortunate convergence 
that uncritically propels the Western powers into action against ex-colonial 
peoples. During the time I have been writing this book, the crisis caused by 
Iraq's invasion and annexation of Kuwait has been in full flower: hundreds 
of thousands of the United States' troops, planes, ships, tanks, missiles 
arrived in Saudi Arabia; Iraq appealed to the Arab world (badly split among 
the United States' supporters like Mubarak ofEgypt, the Saudi royal family, 
the remaining Gulf sheikhs, Moroccans, and outright opponents like Libya 
and Sudan, or caught-in-the-middle powers like Jordan and Palestine) for 
help; the United Nations was divided between sanctions and the United 
States' blockade; and in the end the United States prevailed and a devastat­
ing war was fought. Two central ideas dearly were held over from the past 
and still hold sway: one was the great power's right to safeguard its distant 
interests even to the point of military invasion; the second was that lesser 
powers were also lesser peoples, with lesser rights, morals, claims. 
Perceptions and political attitudes molded and manipulated by the media 
were significant here. In the West, representations of the Arab world ever 
since the 1967 War have been crude, reductionist, coarsely racialist, as much 
critical literature in Europe and the United States has ascertained and 
verified. Yet films and television shows portraying Arabs as sleazy "camel­
jockeys," terrorists, and offensively wealthy "sheikhs" pour forth anyway. 
When the media mobilized behind President Bush's instructions to preserve Discrepant Experiences 37 
the American way oflife and to roll Iraq back, little was said or shown about 
the political, social, cultural actualities of the Arab world (many of them 
deeply influenced by the United States), actualities that made possible both 
the appalling figure of Sad dam Hussein and at the same time a complex set 
of other, radically different configurations--the Arabic novel (whose pre­
eminent practitioner, Naguib Mahfouz, won the 1988 Nobel Prize) and the 
many institutions surviving in what was left of civil society. While it is 
certainly true that the media is far better equipped to deal with caricature 
and sensation than with the slower processes of culture and society, the 
deeper reason for these misconceptions is the imperial dynamic and above 
all its separating, essentializing, dominating, and reactive tendencies. 
Self-definition is one of the activities practiced by all cultures: it has a 
rhetoric, a set of occasions and authorities (national feasts,' for example, times 
of crisis, founding fathers, basic texts, and so on), and a familiarity all its own. 
Yet in a world tied together as never before by the exigencies of electronic 
communication, trade, travel, environmental and regional conflicts that can 
expand with tremendous speed, the assertion of identity is by no means a 
mere ceremonial matter. What strikes me as especially dangerous is that it 
can mobilize passions atavistically, throwing people back to an earlier impe­
rial time when the West and its opponents championed and even embodied 
virtues designed not as virtues so to speak but for war. 
One perhaps trivial example of this atavism occurred in a column written 
for The Wall Street Journal on May 2., 1989, by Bernard Lewis, one of the 
senior Orientalists working in the United States. Lewis was entering the 
debate about changing the "Western canon." To the students and professors 
at Stan(ord University who had voted to modify the curriculum to include 
texts by more non-Europeans, women, and so on, Lewis--speaking as an 
authority on Islam-took the extreme position that "if Western culture does 
indeed go a number of things would go with it and others would come in 
their place." No one had said anything so ludicrous as "Western culture 
must go," but Lewis's argument, focussed on much grander matters than 
strict accuracy, lumbered forward with the remarkable proposition that 
since modifications in the reading list would be equivalent to the demise of 
Western culture, such subjects (he named them specifically) as the restora­
tion of slavery, polygamy, and child marriage would ensue. To this amazing 
thesis Lewis added that "curiosity about other cultures," which he believes 
is unique to the West, would also come to an end. 
This argument, symptomatic and even a trifle comic, is an indication not 
only of a highly inflated sense of Western exclusivity in cultural accomplish­
ment, but also of a tremendously limited, almost hysterically antagonistic 
view of the rest of the world. To say that without the West, slavery and OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
bigamy would rerum is to foreclose the possibility that any advance over 
tyranny and barbarism could or did occur outside the. West. Lewis's argu­
ment has the effect ofdrivingthe non-Westerner into a violent rage or, with 
equally unedifying consequences, into boasting about the achievements of 
non-Western culrures. Rather than affirming the intetdependence of various 
histories on ene another, and the necessary interaction of contemporary 
societies with one another, the rhetorical separation of culrures assured a 
murderous imperial contest between them-the sorry tale is repeated again 
and again. 
Another example occurred in late 1986, during the broadcast and subse­
quent discussion of a television documentary called The Africans. Originally 
commissioned and mostly funded by the BBC, this series was written and 
narrated by a distinguished scholar and professor of political science at the 
University of Michigan, Ali Mazrui, a Kenyan and a Muslim, whose compe­
tence and credibility as a first-rank academic authority were unquestioned. 
Mazrui's series had two premises: one, that for the 6rst time in a history 
dominated by Western representations of Africa (to use the phrase from 
Christopher Miller's book Blank Darkness, by a discourse that is thoroughly 
Africanist in every instance and inflection)4° an African was representing 
himself and Mrica before a Western audience, precisely that audience whose 
societies for several hundred years had pillaged, colonized, enslaved Africa; 
second, that African history was made up of three elements or, in Mazrui's 
language, concentric circles: the native African experience, the experience 
of Islam, and the experience of imperialism. 
For a start, the National Endowment for the Humanities removed its 
financial support for the broadcast of the documentaries, although the series 
ran on PBS anyway. Then The Ne7JJ York Times, the leading American 
newspaper, ran consecutive attacks on the series in articles (September 14, 
October 9 and 16, 1986) by the (then) television correspondent John Corry. 
To describe Corry's pieces as insensate or semi-hysterical would not be an 
exaggeration. Mostly Corry accused Mazrui personally of "ideological" 
exclusions and emphases, for example, that he nowhere mentioned Israel (in 
a program about African history Israel may have appeared to Mazrui as not 
relevant) and that he vastly exaggerated the evils of Western colonialism. 
Corry's attack especially singled out Mazrui's "moralistic and political ordi­
·nates," a peculiar euphemism implying that Mazrui was little more than an 
unscrupulous propagandist, the better to be able to challenge Mazrui's 
figures about such things as the number of people who died in building the 
Suez Canal, the number killed during the Algerian war ofliberation, and so 
on; Lurking near the rurbulent and disorderly surface of Corry's prose was 
the (to him) disrurbing and unacceptable reality of Maziui's performance Discrepant Experiences 39 
itself. Here at last was an African on prime-time television, in the West, 
daring to accuse the West of what it had done, thus reopening a file consid­
ered dosed. That Mazrui also spoke well of Islam, that he showed a com­
mand of"Western" historical method and political rhetoric, that, in fine, he 
appeared as a convincing model of a real human being-all these ran 
contrary to the reconstituted imperial ideology for which Corry was, per.,­
haps inadvertently, speaking. At its heart lay the axiom that non-Europeans 
should not represent their views of European and American history as those 
histories impinged on the colonies; if they did, they had to be very firmly 
resisted. 
The entire legacy of what can metaphorically be called the tension 
between Kipling, who finally saw only the politics of empire, and Fanon, 
who tried to look past the nationalist assertions succeedi~g classical imperi­
alism, has been disastrous. Let us allow that, given the discrepancy between 
European colonial power and that of the colonized societies, there was a 
kind of historical necessity by which colonial pressure created anti-colonial 
resistance. What concerns me is the way in which, generations later, the 
conflict continues in an impoverished and for that reason all the more 
dangerous form, thanks to an uncritical alignment between intellectuals and 
institutions of power which reproduces the pattern of an earlier imperialist 
history. This results, as I noted earlier, in an intellectual politics of blame 
and a drastic reduction in the range of material proposed for attention and 
controversy by public intellectuals and cultural historians. 
What is the inventory of the various strategies that might be employed to 
widen, expand, and deepen our awareness of the way the past and present 
of the imperial encounter interact with each other? This seems to me a 
question of immediate importance, and indeed explains the idea behind this 
book. Let me very briefly illustrate my idea with two examples that are 
usefully presented, I think, in anecdotal form; in subsequent pages I shall 
present a more formal and methodological account of the issues and of the 
cultural interpretations and politics that follow. . 
A few years ago I had a chance encounter with an Arab Christian clergy­
man who had come to the United States, he told me, on an exceedingly 
urgent and unpleasant mission. As I myself happened to be a member by 
birth of the small but significant minority he served-Arab Christian Protes­
tants-! was most interested in what he had to say. Since the 186os there has 
been a Protestant community comprising a few sects scattered throughout 
the Levant, largely the result of the imperial competition for converts and 
constituents in the Ottoman Empire, principally in Syria, Lebanon, and 
Palestine. In time of course these congregations-Presbyterian, Evangelical, 
Episcopalian, Baptist, among others-acquired their own identities and tra-OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
ditions, their own instirutions, all of which without exception played an 
honorable role during the period of the Arab Renaissance. 
Roughly no years later, however, the very same European and American 
synods and churches who had authorized and indeed sustained the early 
missionary efforts appeared, quite without warning, to be reconsidering the 
matter. It had become dear to them that Eastern Christianity was really 
constituted by the Greek Orthodox Church (from which, it should be noted, 
the overwhelming majority ofLevantine converts to Protestantism came: the 
nineteenth-cenrury Christian missionaries were totally unsuccessful in con­
verting either Muslims or Jews). Now, in the 198os, the Western principals 
of the Arab Protestant communities were encouraging their acolytes to 
rerum to the Orthodox fold. There was talk of withdrawing financial sup­
port, of disbanding the churches and schools, of cancelling the whole thing 
in a sense. The missionary authorities had made a mistake one hundred 
years ago in severing Eastern Christians from the main church. Now they 
should go back. 
To my clergyman friend this was a truly drastic evenruality; were it not 
for the genuinely aggrieved sensibility involved, one might have considered 
the whole matter merely a cruel joke. What struck me most strongly, 
however, was the way in which my friend put his argument. This was what 
he was in America to say to his ecclesiastical principals: he could understand 
the new doctrinal point being put forward, that modern ecumenism ought 
generally to go in the direction of dissolving small sects and preserving the 
dominant community, rather than encouraging these sects to remain inde­
pendent from the main church. That you could discuss. But what seemed 
horrendously imperialist and entirely of the realm of power politics was, he 
said, the total disregard with which over a cenrury of Arab Protestant 
experience was simply scratched off as if it had never happened. They do 
not seem to realize, my gravely affected friend told me, that while once we 
were their' converts and students, we have in fact been their partners for well 
over a century. We have trusted them and our own experience. We have 
developed our own integrity and lived our own Arab Protestant identity 
within our sphere, but also spirirually within theirs. How do they expect us 
to efface our modern history, which is an autonomous one? How can they 
say that the mistake they made a century ago can be rectified today by a 
stroke of the pen in New York or London? 
One should note that this touching story concerns an experience of 
imperialism that is essentially one of sympathy and congruence, not of 
antagonism, resentment, or resistance. The appeal by one of the parties was 
to the value of a mutual experience. True, there had once been a principal 
and a subordinate, but there had also been dialogue and communication. Di1crepant Experience~ 
One can see in the story, I think, the power to give or withhold attention, 
a power utterly essential to interpretation and to politics. The implicit 
argument made by the Western missionary authorities was that the Arabs 
had gotten something valuable out of what had been given them, but in this 
relationship of historical dependence and subordination, all the giving went 
one way, the value was mainly on one side. Murqality was considered to be 
basically impossible. 
This is a parable about the area of attention, greater or lesser in size, more 
or less equal in value and quality, that is furnished for interpretation by the 
post-imperial situation. 
The second general point I want to make can also be made by example. 
One of the canonical topics of modern intellectual history has been the 
development of dominant discourses and disciplinary tr~dirions in the main 
fields of scientific, social, and cultural inquiry. Without exceptions I know 
of, the paradigms for this topic have been drawn from what are considered 
exclusively Western sources. Foucault's work is one instance and so, in 
another domain, is Raymond Williams's. In the main I am in considerable 
sympathy with the genealogical discoveries of these two formidable scholars, 
and greatly indebted to them. Yet for both the imperial experience is quite 
irrelevant, a theoretical oversight that is the norm in Western cultural and 
scientific disciplines ·except in occasional studies of the history of anthropol­
ogy-like Johannes Fabian's Time and the Other and Tala! Asad's Anthropoior;y 
and the Colonial Encpunter-or the development of sociology, such as Brian 
Turner's Man and the End of0rimtalism. 41 Part of the impulse behind what 
I tried to dQ in 'my book Orienta/ism was to show the dependence of what 
appeared to be detached and apolitical cultural disciplines upon a quite 
sordid history of imperialist ideology and colonialist practice. 
But I will confess that I was also consciously trying to express dissatisfac­
tion at the consolidated walls of denial that had been built around policy 
studies passing themselves off as uncontroversial, essentially pragmatic 
scholarly enterprises. Whatever effect my book achieved would not have 
occurred had there not also been some readiness on the part of a younger 
generation of scholars, in the West and in the formerly colonized world, to 
take a fresh look at their collective histories. Despite the acrimony and 
recriminations that followed their efforts, many important revisionary works 
have appeared. (Actually, they started to appear as early as one hundred 
years ago, during the resistance to empire all through the non-Western 
world.) Many of these more recent works, which I discuss elsewhere in this 
book, are valuable because they get beyond the reified polarities of East 
versus West, and in an intelligent and concrete way attempt to understand 
the heterogenous and often odd developments that used to elude the so-OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
called world historians as well as the colonial Orientalists, who have tended 
to herd immense amounts of material under simple and all-encompassing 
rubrics. Examples worth mentioning include Peter Gran's study on the 
Islamic roots of modem capitalism in Egypt, Judith Tucker's .research on 
Egyptian family and village structure under the infl.uence of imperialism, 
Hanna Batatu's monumental work on the formation of modern state institu­
tions in the Arab world, and S. H. Alatas's great study The Myth of the Lazy 
Native.'*2 
Yet few works have dealt with the more complex genealogy of contempo­
rary culture and ideology. One notable effort has been the recently pub­
lished work of a Columbia doctoral student from India, a trained scholar and 
teacher of Engli~h literature whose historical and cultural research has, I 
think, uncovered the political origins of modern English studies a!ld located 
them to a significant extent in the system of colonial education imposed on 
natives in nineteenth-century India. A great deal about Gauri Viswanathan's 
work, The Masks of ConqueJt, has unusual interest, but her central point 
alone is important: that what has conventionally been thought of as a disci­
pl~ne created entirely by and for British youth was first created by early­
nineteenth-century colonial administrators for the ideological pacification 
and re-formation of a potentially rebellious Indian population, and then 
imported into England for a very different but related use there.43 The 
evidence, I think, is incontrovertible and free from "nativism," an especially 
besetting hobble of most post-colonial work. Most important, though, this 
kind of study maps out a varied and intertWined archeology for knowledge 
whose actualities lie considerably below the surface hitherto assumed to 
be the true locus, and textuality, of what we study as literature, history, cul­
ture, and philosophy. The implications are vast, and they pull us away 
from routinized polemics on the superiority ofWestern over non-Western 
models. 
There is no way of dodging the truth that the present ideological and 
political moment is a difficult one for the alternative norms for intellectual 
·work that I proposein this book. There is also no escape from the pressing 
and urgent calls many of us are likely to respond to from embattled causes 
and turbulent fields of battle. The ones that involve me as an Arab are, alas, 
perfect cases in point, and they are exacerbated by pressures exerted on me 
as an American. Nevertheless, a resistant, perhaps ultimately subjective 
component of oppositional energy resides in the intellectual or critical 
vocation itself, and one has to rely on mobilizing this, particularly when 
collective passions seem mostly harnessed to movements for patriotic domi­
nation and nationalist coercion, even in studies and disciplines that claim to Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 43 
be humanistic. In standing up to and challenging their power, we should try 
to enlist what we can truly comprehend of other cultures and periods. 
For the trained scholar of comparative literature, a field whose origin and 
purpose is to move beyond insularity and provincialism and to see several 
cultures and literatures together, contrapuntally, there is an already consid­
erable investment in precisely this kind of antidote to reductive nationalism 
and uncritical dogma: after all, the constitution and early aims of compara­
tive literature were to get a perspective beyond one's own nation, to see 
some son of whole instead of the defensive little patch offered by one's own 
culture, literature, and history. I suggest that we look first at what compara­
tive literature originally was, as vision and as practice; ironically, as we shall 
see, the study of "comparative literature" originated in .the period of high 
European imperialism and is irrecusably linked to it. Then we can draw out 
of comparative literature's subsequent trajectory a better sense of what it can 
do in modern culture and politics, which imperialism continues to influence. 
( v ) 
Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 
From long before World War Two until the early 197os, the main 
tradition ofcomparative-literature studies in Europe and the United 
States was heavily dominated by a style of scholarship that has now almost 
disappeared. The main feature of this older style was that it was scholarship 
principally, and not what we have come to call criticism. No one today is 
trained as were Erich Auerbach and Leo Spitzer, two of the great German 
comparatists who found refuge in the United States as a result of fascism: this 
is as much a quantitative as a qualitative fact. Whereas today's comparatist 
will present his or her qualifications in Romanticism between 1795' and 183o 
iri France, England, and Germany, yesterday's comparatist was more likely, 
first, to have studied an earlier period; second, to have done a long appren­
ticeship with various philological and scholarly expens in various universi­
ties in various fields over many years; third, to have a secure grounding in 
all or most of the classical languages, the early European vernaculars, and 
their liter~tures. The early-twentieth-century comparatist was a philolog 
who, as Francis Fergusson put it in a review of Auerbach's Mimesis, was so 
learned and had so much stamina as to make "our most intransigent 'schol-44 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
ars'-those who pretend with the straightest faces to scientific rigor and 
exhaustiveness--[ appear to be] timid and relaxed." 44 
Behind such scholars was an even longer tradition of humanistic learning 
that derived from that effiorescence of secular anthropology-which in­
cluded a revolution in the philological disciplines--we associate with the 
late eighteenth cenmry and with such figures as Vico, Herder, Rousseau, and 
the brothers Schlegel. And underlying their work was the belief that mankind 
formed a marvelous, almost symphonic whole whose progress and forma­
tions, again as a whole, could be srudied exclusively as a concerted and 
secular historical experience, not as an exemplification of the divine. Be­
cause "man" has made history, there was a special hermeneutical way of 
srudying history that ditfered in intent as well as method from the namral 
sciences. These great Enlightenment insights became widespread, !lnd were 
accepted in Germany, France, Italy, Russia, Switzerland, and subsequently, 
England. 
It is not a vulgarization of history to remark that a major reason why such 
a view of human culrure became current in Europe and America in several 
different forms during the two cenruries between 1745 and 1945 was the 
striking rise of nationalism during the same period. The interrelationships 
between scholarship (or literamre, for that matter) and the instimtions of 
nationalism have not been as seriously smdied as they should, but it is 
nevertheless evident that when most European thinkers celebrated human­
ity or culmre they were principally celebrating ideas and values they as­
cribed to their own national culmre, or to Europe as distinct from the Orient, 
Africa, and even the Americas. What partly animated my smdy of Oriental­
ism was my critique of the way in which the alleged universalism of fields 
such as the classics (not to mention historiography, anthropology, and soci­
ology) was Eurocentric in the extreme, as if other literamres and societies 
had either an inferior or a transcended value. (Even the comparatists trained 
in the dignified tradition that produced Curtius and Auerbach showed little 
interest in Asian, African, or Latin American texrs.) And as the national and 
international competition between European countries increased during the 
nineteenth cenmry, so too did the level of intensity in competition between 
one national scholarly interpretative tradition and another. Ernest Renan's 
polemics on Germany and the Jewish tradition are a well-known example 
of this. 
Yet this narrow, often strident nationalism was in fact counteracted by a 
more generous culmral vision represented by the intellecmal ancestors of 
Curtius and Auerbach, scholars whose ideas emerged in pre-imperial Ger­
many (perhaps as compensation for the political unification eluding the 
country), and, a little later, in France. These thinkers took natio!lalism to Connecting .Empire to Secular Interpretation 45 
be a transitory, finally secondary matter: what mattered far more was the 
concert of peoples and spirits that transcended the shabby political realm 
of bureaucracy, armies, customs barriers, and xenophobia. Out of this catho­
lic tradition, to which European (as opposed to national) thinkers appealed 
in times of severe conflict, came the idea that the comparative study of 
literature could furnish a trans-national, even trans-human perspective on 
literary performance. Thus the idea of comparative literature not only 
expressed universality and the kind of understanding gained by philologists 
about language families, but also symbolized the crisis-free serenity of an 
almost ideal realm. Standing above small-minded political affairs were both 
a kind of anthropological Eden in which men and women happily produced 
something called literature, and a world that Ma~ew Arnold and his 
disciples designated as that of"culture," where only "the best that is thought 
and known" could be admitted. · 
Goethe's idea of Wrlditeratu1'-a concept that waffled between the notion . 
of "great books" and a vague synthesis of all the world's literatures--was 
very important to professional scholars of comparative literature in the early 
twentieth century. But still, as I have suggested, its practical meaning and 
operating ideology were that, so far as literature and culture were con­
cerned, Europe led the way and was the main subject of interest. In the world 
of great scholars such as Karl Vossler and DeSanctis, it is most specifically 
Romania that makes intelligible and provides a center for the enormous 
grouping of literatures produced world-wide; Romania underpins Europe, 
just as (in a curiously regressive way) the Church and the Holy Roman 
Empire guarantee the integrity of the core European literatures. At a still 
deeper level, it is from the Christian Incarnation that Western realistic 
literature as we know it emerges. This tenaciously advanced thesis ex­
plained Dante's supreme importance to Auerbach, Curtius, Vossler, and 
Spitzer. 
To speak of comparative literature therefore was to speak of the interac­
tion of world literatures with one another, but the field was epistemologi­
cally organized as a son of hierarcjly, with Europe and its Latin Christian 
literatures at its center and top. When Auerbach, in a justly famous essay 
entitled "Philologie der Wrltliteratur," written after World War Two, takes 
note of how many "other" literary languages and literatures seemed to have 
emerged (as if from nowhere: he makes no mention of either colonialism or 
decolonization), he expresses more anguish and fear than pleasure at the 
prospect_of what he seems so reluctant to acknowledge. Romania is under 
threat. 45 
Certainly American practitioners and academic departments found this 
European pattern a congenial one to emulate. The first American depart-OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
ment of comparative literature was established in 1891 at Columbia Univer­
sity, as was the first journal of comparative literature. Consider what George 
Edward Woodberry-the department's first chaired professor-had to say 
about his field: 
The parts of the world draw together, and with them the parts of 
knowledge, slowly knitting into that one intellectual state which, above 
the sphere of politics and. with no more institutional machinery than 
tribunals of jurists and congresses of gentlemen, will be at last the true 
bond of all the world. The modern scholar shares more than other 
citizens in the benefits of this enlargement and intercommunication, 
this age equally of expansion and concentration on the vast scale, this 
infinitely extended and intimate commingling of nations with one 
another and with the past; his ordinary mental experience includes 
more of race-memory· and of race-imagination than belonged to his 
predecessors, and his outlook before and after is on greater horizons; he 
lives in a larger world-is, in fact, born no longer to the freedom of a 
city merely, however noble, but to that new citizenship in the rising 
state which-the obscurer or brighter dream of all great scholars from 
Plato to Goethe-is without frontiers or race or force, but there is 
reason supreme. The emergence and growth of the new study known 
as Comparative Literature are incidental to the coming of this larger 
world and the entrance of scholars upon its work: the study will run its 
course, and together with other converging elements goes to its goal in 
the unity of mankind found in the spiritual unities of science, art and 
love.46 
Such rhetoric uncomplicatedly and naively resonates with the influence of 
Croce and De Sanctis, and also with the earlier ideas of Wilhelm von 
Humboldt. But there is a certain quaintness in Woodberry's "tribunals of 
jurists and congresses of gentlemen," more than a little belied by the actuali­
ties of life in the "larger world" he speaks of. In a time of the greatest 
Western imperial· hegemony in history, Woodberry manages to overlook 
that dominating form of political unity in order to celebrate a still higher, 
strictly ideal unity. He is unclear about how "the spiritual unities of science, 
art and love" are to deal with less pleasant realities, much less how "spiritual 
unities" can be expected to overcome the facts of materiality, power, and 
political division. · 
Academic work in comparative literatur-e carried with it the notion that 
Europe and the United States together were the center of the world, not 
simply by virtue of their political positions, but also because their literatures Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 47 
were the ones most worth studying. When Europe succumbed to fascism and 
when the United States benefitted so richly from the many emigre scholars. 
who came to it, understandably little of their sense of crisis took root with 
them. Mime.ri.r, for example, written while Auerbach was in exile from Nazi 
Europe in Istanbul, was not simply ap exercise in textual explication, but­
he says in his 19.)1 essay to which I have just referred-an act of civilizational 
survival. It had seemed to him that his mission as a comparatist was to 
present, perhaps for the last time, the complex evolution of European 
literature in all its variety from Homer to Virginia Woolf. Curtius's book on 
the Larin Middle Ages was composed out of the same driven fear. Yet how 
little of that spirit survived in the thousands of academic literary scholars 
who were influenced by these two books! Mime.ri.r was praised for being a 
remarkable work of rich analysis, but the sense of its mission died in the 
often trivial uses made of it.47 Finally in the late 19SOS Sputnik came along, 
and transformed the study of foreign languages-and of comparative litera­
ture-into fields directly affecting national security. The National Defense 
Education Acr48 promoted the field and, with it, alas, an even more compla­
cent ethnocentrism and covert Cold Warriorism than Woodberry could 
have imagined. 
As Mime.ri.r immediately reveals, however, the notion 'of Western litera­
ture that lies at the very core of comparative study centrally highlights, 
dramatizes, and celebrates a certain idea of history, and at the same time 
obscures the fundamental geographical and political reality empowering 
that idea. The.idea of European or Western literary history contained in it 
and the other scholarly works of comparative literature is essentially idealis­
tic and, in an unsystematic way, Hegelian. Thus the principle of develop­
ment by which Romania is said to have acquired dominance is incorporative 
and synthetic. More and more reality is included in a literature that expands 
and elaborates from the medieval chronicles to the great edifices of nine­
teenth-century narrative fiction-in the works of Stendhal; Balzac, Zola, 
Dickens, Proust. Each work in the progression represents a synthesis of 
problematic elements that disturb the basic Christian order so memorably 
laid out in the Divine Comedy. Class, political upheavals, shifts in economic 
patterns and organization; war: all these subjects, for great authors like 
Cervantes, Shakespeare, Montaigne, as well as for a host oflesser writers, are 
enfolded within recurringly renewed structures, visions, stabilities, all of 
them attesting to the abiding dialectical order represented by Europe itself. 
The salutary vision of a "world literature" that acquired a redemptive 
status in the twentieth century coincides with what theorists of colonial 
geography also articulated. In the writings of Halford Mackinder, George 
Chisolm, Georges Hardy, Leroy-Beaulieu; and Lucien Fevre, a much OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
franker appraisal of the world system appears, equally metrocentric and 
imperial; but instead of history alone, now both empire and actual geograph­
ical space collaborate to produce a "world-empire" commanded by Europe. 
But in this geographically articulated vision (much ofit based, as Paul Carter 
shows in The Road to Botany Bay, on the cartographic results of actual geo­
graphical exploration and conquest) there is no less strong a commitment to 
the belief that European pre-eminence is natural, the culmination of what 
Chisolm calls various "historical advantages" that allowed Europe to over­
ride the "natural advantages" of the more fertile, wealthy, and accessible 
regions it controlled. 49 Fevre's La Terre et /'evolution humaine (19zz ), a vigorous 
and integral encyclopedia, matches Woodberry for its scope and utopianism. 
To their audience in the late nineteenth and early twP-ntieth centuries, the 
great geographical synthesizers offered technical explanations for ready 
political actualities. Europe did command the world; the imperial map did 
license the cultural vision. To us, a century later, the coincidence or 
similarity between one vision of a world system and the other, between 
geography and literary history, seems interesting but problematic. What 
should we do with this similarity.? 
First of all, I believe, it needs articulation and activation, which can only 
come about if we take serious account of the present, and notably of the 
dismantling of the classical empires and the new independence of dozens of 
formerly colonized peoples and territories. We need to see that the contem­
porary global setting~verlapping territories, intertwined histories-was 
already prefigured and inscribed in the coincidences and convergences 
among geography, culture, and history that were so important to the pio­
neers of comparative literature. Then we can grasp in a new and more 
dynamic way both the idealist historicism which fuelled the comparatist 
"world literature" scheme and the concretely imperial world map of the 
same moment. 
But that cannot be done without accepting that what is common to both 
is an elaboration of power. The genuinely profound scholarship of the 
people who believed in and practiced Weltliter.aturimplied the extraordinary 
privilege of an observer located in the West who could actually S\lrvey the 
world's literary output with a kind of sovereign detachment. Orientalists and 
other specialists about the non-European world-anthropologists, histori­
ans, philologists--had that power, and, as I have tried to show elsewhere, it 
often went hand in glove with a consciously undertaken imperial enterprise. 
We must articulate these various sovereign dispositions and see their com-
mon methodology. . 
An explicitly geographical model is provided in Gramsci's essay Some 
Aspects of the Southern Q!festion. Under-read and under-analyzed, this study is Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 49 
the only sustained piece of political and cultural analysis Gramsci wrote 
(although he never finished it); it addresses the geographical conundrum 
posed for action and analysis by his comrades as to how to think about, plan 
fur, and study southern Italy, given that its social disintegration made it seem 
incomprehensible yet paradoxically crucial to an understanding of the north. 
Gramsci's brilliant analysis goes, I think, beyond its. tactical relevance to 
Italian politics in 1926, for it provides a culmination to his journalism before 
1926 and also a prelude to The Pri1on Notebook1, in which he gave, as his 
towering counterpart Lukacs did not, paramount focus to the territorial, 
spatial, geographical foundations of social life. 
Lukacs belongs to the Hegelian tradition of Marxism, Gramsci to a 
Vichian; Crocean departure from it. For Lukacs the central problematic in 
his major work through Hi1tory and Cla.r1 Con1cioumeJJ (1923) is temporality; 
for Gramsc~ as even a cursory examination of his conceptual vocabulary 
immediately reveals, social history and actuality are grasped in geographical 
terms--such words as "terrain," "territory," "blocks," and "region" predomi­
nate. In The Southern fl.!feJtion, Gramsci not only is at pains to show that the 
division between the northern and southern regions of Italy is basic to the 
challenge of what to do politically about the national working-class move­
ment at a moment of impasse, but also is fastidious in d~cribing the peculiar 
topography of the south, remarkable, as he says, for the striking contrast 
between the large undifferentiated mass of peasants on the one hand, and the 
presence of "big" landowners, important publishing houses, and distin­
guished cultural formations on the other. Croce himself, a most impressive 
and notable figure in Italy, is seen by Gramsci with characteristic shrewdness 
as a southern philosopher who finds it easier to relate to Europe and to Plato 
than to his own crumbling meridional environment. 
The problem therefore is how to C(>nnect the south, whose poverty and 
vast labor pool are inertly vulnerable to northern economic policies· and 
powers, with a north drat is dependent on it. Gramsci formulates the answer 
in ways that. forecast his celebrated animadversions on the intellectual in the 
fl.!faderni: he considers Piero Gobetti, who as an intellectual understood the 
need for connecting the northern proletariat with the southern peasantry, a 
strategy that stood in stark contrast with the careers of Croce and Guistino 
Fortunato, and who linked north and south by virtue of his capacity for 
organizing culture. His work "posed the Southern question ·on a terrain 
different from the traditional one [which regarded the south simply as a 
backward region of Italy] by introducing into it the proletariat of the 
North." 50 But this introduction could not occur, Gramsci continues, unless 
one remembered that intellectual work is slower, works according to more 
extended calendars than that of any other social group. Culture cannot be jO OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
looked at as an immediate fact but has to be seen (as he was to say in the 
~atlerni) tub specie aeternitatir. Much time elapses before new cultural for­
mations emerge, and intellectuals, who depend on long years of preparation, 
action, and tradition, are necessary to the process. 
Gramsci also understands that in the extended time span during which 
the coral-like formation of a culture occurs, one needs "breaks of an organic 
kind." Gobetti represents one such break, a fissure that opened up within the 
cultural s~crures that supported and occluded the north-south discrepancy 
for so long in Italian history. Gramsci regards Gobetti with evident warmth, 
appreciation, and cordiality as an individual, but his political and social 
significance for Gramsci's analysis of the southern question-and it is appro­
priate that the unfinished essay ends abruptly with this consideration of 
Gobetti-is that he accentuates the need for a• social formation to develop, 
elaborate, build upon the break instituted by his work, and by his insistence 
that intellectual effon itself furnishes the link between disparate, apparently 
autonomous regions of human history. 
What we might call the Gobetti factor functions like an animating con­
nective that expresses and represents the relationship between the develop­
ment of comparative literature and the emergence of imperial geography, 
and does-so dynamically and organically. To say of both discourses merely 
that they are imperialist is to say little about where and how they take place. 
Above all it leaves out what makes it possible for us to articulate them 
together, as an ensemble, as having a relationship that is more than coinciden­
tal, conjunctural, mechanical. For this we must look at the domination of the 
non-European world from the perspective of a resisting, gradually more and 
more challenging alternative. 
Without significant exception the universalizing discourses of modern 
Europe and the United States assume the silence, willing or otherwise, of the 
non-European world. There is incorporation; there is inclusion; there is 
direct rule; there is coercion. But there is only infreqnently an acknowledge­
ment that the colonized people should be heard from, their ideas known. 
It is possible to argue that the continued production and interpretation of 
Western culture itself made exactly the same assumption well on into the 
twentieth century, even as political resistance grew to the West's power in 
the "peripheral" world. Because of that, and because of where it led, it 
becomes possible now to reinterpret the Western cultural archive as if 
fractured geographically by the activated imperial divide, to do a rather 
different kind of reading and interpretation. In the first place, the history of 
fields like comparative literature, English studies, cultural analysis, anthro­
pology can be seen as affiliated with the empire and, in a manner of speaking, Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation JI 
even contributing to its methods for maintaining Western ascendancy over 
non-Western natives, especially if we are aware of the spatial consciousness 
exemplified in Gramsci's "southern question." And in the second place our 
interpretative change of perspective allows us to challenge the sovereign and 
unchallenged authority of the allegedly detached Western observer. 
Western cultural forms can be taken out of the autonomous enclosures in 
which they have been protected, and placed instead in the dynamic global 
environment created by imperialism, itself revised as an ongoing contest 
between north and south, metropolis and periphery, white and native. We 
may thus consider imperialism as a process occurring as pan of the metro­
politan culture, which at times acknowledges, at other times obscilres the 
sustained business of the empire itsel£ The important point-a very Grams-
. cian one--is how the national British, French, and American cultures main­
tained hegemony over the peripheries. How within them was consent gained 
and continuously consolidated for the distant rule of native peoples and 
territories? 
As we look back at the cultural archive, we begin to reread it not univo­
caUy but contrapuntally, with a simultaneous awareness both of the metropoli­
tan history that is narrated and of those other histories against which (and 
together with which) the dominating discourse acts. In the counterpoint of 
Western classical music, various themes play off one another, with only a 
provisional privilege being given to any particular one; yet in the resulting 
polyphony there is concert and order, an organized interplay that derives 
from the themes, not from a rigorous melodic or formal principle outside the 
work. In the same way, I believe, we can read and interpret English novels, 
for example, whose engagement (\Jsually suppressed for the most part) with 
the West Indies or India, say, is shaped and perhaps even determined by the 
specific histo.ry of colonization, resistance, and finally native nationalism. At 
this point alternative or new narratives emerge, and they become institu­
tionalized or discursively stable entities. 
It should be evident that no one overarching theoretical principle governs 
the whole imperialist ensemble, and it should be just as evident that the 
principle of domination and resistance based on the division between the 
West and the rest of the world-to adapt freely from the African critic 
Chinweizu-runs like a fissure throughout. That fissure affected all the 
many local engagements, overlappings, interdependencies in Africa, India, 
and elsewhere in the peripheries, each different, each with its own density 
of associations and forms, its own motifs, works, institutions, and-most 
important from our point of view as rereaders--its own possibilities and 
conditions of knowledge. For each locale in which the engagement occurs, f2. OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
and the imperialist model is disassembled, its incorporative, universalizing, 
and totalizing codes rendered ineffective and inapplicable, a particular type 
of research and knowledge begins to build up. 
An example of the new knowledge would be the study of Orientalism or 
Africanism and, to take a related set, the study of Englishness and French­
ness. These identities are today analyzed not as god-given essences, but as 
results of collaboration between African history and the study of Africa in 
England,. for instance, or between the study of French history and the 
reorganization of knowledge during the First Empire. In an important sense, 
we are dealing with the formation of cultural identities understood not as 
essentializations (although part of their enduring appeal is that they seem· 
and are considered to be like essentializations) but as contrapuntal ensem­
bles, for it is the case that no identity can ever exist by itself and without an 
array of opposites, negatives, oppositions: Greeks always require barbarians, 
and Europeans Africans, Orientals, etc. The opposite is certainly true as 
well. Even the mammoth engagements in our own time over such essentiali­
zations as "Islam," the "West," the "Orient."''1apan," or "Europe" admit to 
a particular knowledge and structures of attitude and reference, and those 
require careful analysis and research. 
If one studies some of the major metropolitan cultures-England's, 
France's and the United States', for instance--in the geographical context of 
their struggles for (and over) empires, a distinctive cultural topography 
becomes apparent. In using the phrase "structures of attitude and reference" 
I have this topography in mind, as I also have in mind Raymond Williams's 
seminal phrase "structures of feeling." I am talking about the way in which 
structures of location and geographical, reference appear in the cultural 
languages of literature, history, or ethnography, sometimes allusively and 
sometimes carefully plotted, across several individual works that are not 
otherwise connected to one another or to an official ideology of "empire." 
In British culture, for instance, one may discover a consistency of concern 
in Spensef, Shakespeare, Defoe, and Austen that fixes socially desirable, 
empowered space in metropolitan England or Europe and connects it by 
design, motive, and development to distant or peripheral worlds (Ireland, 
Venice, Africa, Jamaica), conceived of as desirable but subordinate. And with 
these meticulously maintained references come attitudes-about rule, con­
trol, profit and enhancement and suitability-that grow with astonishing 
power from the seventeenth to the end of the nineteenth century. These 
structures do ·not arise from some pre-existing (semi-conspiratorial) design 
that the writers then manipulate, but are bound up with the development of 
Britain's cultural identity, as that identity imagines itself in a geographically 
conceived world. Similar structures may be remarked in French and Ameri-Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 53 
can cultures, growing for different reasons and obviously in different ways. 
We are not yet at the stage where we can say whether these globally integral 
structures are preparations for imperial control and conquest, or whether 
they accompany such enterprises, or whether in some reflective or careless 
way they are a result of empire. We are only at a stage where we must look 
at the astonishing frequency of geographical articulations in the three West­
ern cultures that most dominated far-flung territories. In the second chapter 
of this book I explore this question and advance further arguments about it. 
To the best of my ability to have read and understood these "structures 
of attitude and reference," there was scarcely any dissent, any departure, any ' 
demurral from them: there was virtual unanimity that subject races should 
be ruled, that they are subject races, that one race deserves and has consis­
tently earned the right to be considered the race·whose main mission is to 
expand beyond its own domain. (Indeed, as Seeley was to put it in 1883, about 
Britain-France and the United States had their own theorists-th~ British 
could only be understood as such.) It is perhaps embarrassing that sectors of 
the metropolitan cultures that have since become vanguards in the social 
contests of our time were uncomplaining members of this imperial consen­
sus. With few exceptions, the women's as well as the working-class move­
~ent was pro-empire. And, while one must always be at great pains to show 
that different imaginations, sensibilities, ideas, and philosophies were at 
work, and that each work of literature or art is special, there was virtual 
unity of purpose on this score: the empire must be maintained, and it 'WIIS 
maintained. 
Reading and interpreting the major metropolitan cultural texts in this 
newly activated, reinfonned way could not have been possible without the 
movements of resistance that occurred everywhere in the peripheries 
against the empire. In the third chapter of this book I make the claim that 
a new global consciousness connects all the various local arenas of anti­
imperial contest. And today writers and scholars from the formerly colo­
nized world hav.e imposed their diverse histories on, have mapped their local 
geographies in, the great canonical texts of the European center. And from 
these overlapping yet discrepant interactions the new readings and knowl­
edges are beginning to appear. One need only think of the tremendously 
powerful upheavals that occurred at the end of the 198os-the breaking 
down of barriers, the popular insurgencies, the drift across borders, the 
looming problems of immigrant, refugee, and minority rights in the West­
to see how obsolete are the old categories, the tight separations, and the 
comfortable autonomies. 
It is very important, though, to assess how these entities were built, and 
to understand how patiently the idea of an unencumbered English culture, 54 OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
for example, acquired its authority and its power to impose itself across the 
seas. This is a tremendous task for any individual, but a whole new genera­
tion of scholars and intellectuals from the Third World is engaged on just 
such an undertaking. 
Here a word of caution and prudence is required. One theme I take up 
is the uneasy relationship between nationalism and liberation, two ideals or 
goals for people engaged against imperialism. In the main it is true that the 
creation of very many newly independent nation-states in the post-colonial 
world has succeeded in re-establishing the primacy of what have been called 
imagined communities, parodied and mocked by writers like V. S. Naipaul 
and Conor Cruise O'Brien, hijacked by a host of dictators and petty tyrants, 
enshrined in various state nationalisms. Nevertheless in general there is an 
oppositional quality to the consciousness of many Third World scholars and 
intellectuals, particularly (but not exclusively) those who are exiles, expatri­
ates, or refugees and immigrants in the West, many of them inheritors of the 
· work done by earlier twentieth-century expatriates like George Antonius 
and C.L.R. James. Their work in trying to connect experiences across the 
imperial divide, in re-examining the great canons, in producing what in 
effect is a critical literature cannot be, and generally has not been, co-opted 
by the resurgent nationalisms, despotisms, and ungenerous ideologies that 
betrayed the liberationist ideal in favor of the nationalist independence 
actuality. 
Moreover their work should be seen as sharing important concerns with 
minority and "suppressed" voices within the metropolis itself: feminists, 
African-American writers, intellectuals, artists, among others. But here too 
vigilance and self-criticism are crucial, since there is an inherent danger to 
oppositional effort of becoming institutionalized, marginality turning into 
separatism, and resistance hardening into dogma. Surely the activism that 
reposits and reformulates the political challenges in intellectual life is safe­
guarded against orthodoxy. But there is always a need to keep community 
before coercion, criticism before mere solidarity, and vigilance ahead of 
assent. 
Since my themes here are a sort of sequel to Orienta/ism, which like this 
book was written in the United States, some consideration of America's 
cultural and political environment is warranted. The United States is no 
ordinary large country. The United States is the last superpower, an enor­
mously influential, frequently interventionary power nearly everywhere in 
the world. Citizens and intellectuals of the United States have a particular 
responsibility for what goes on between the United States and the rest of the 
world, a responsibility that is in no way discharged or fulfilled by saying that 
the Soviet Union, Britain, France, or China were, or are, worse. The fact is Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 55 
that we are indeed responsible for, and therefore more capable of, influenc­
ing this country in ways that we were not for the pre-Gorbachev Soviet 
Union, or other countries. So we should first take scrupulous note of how in 
Central and Latin America-to mention the most obvious--as well as in the 
Middle East, Africa, and Asia, the United States has replaced the great 
earlier empires and is the dominant outside force. 
Looked at honestly, the record is not a good one. United States military 
interventions since World War Two have occurred (and are still occurring) 
on nearly every continent, many of great complexity and extent, with 
tremendous national investment, as we are now only beginning to under­
stand. All of this is, in William Appleman Williams's phrase, empire as a way 
of life. The continuing disclosures about the war in Vietnam, about the 
United States' suppon of "contras" in Nicaragua, about the crisis in the 
Persian Gulf, are only pan of the story of this complex of interventions. 
Insufficient attention is paid to the fact that United States Middle ,Eastern 
and Central American policies--whether exploiting a geo-political opening 
among Iranian so-called moderates, or aiding the so-called Contra Freedom 
Fighters in overthrowing the elected, legal government of Nicaragua, or 
coming to the aid of the Saudi and Kuwaiti royal families--can only be 
described as imperialist. 
Even if we were to allow, as many have, that United States foreign policy 
is principally altruistic and dedicated to such unimpeachable goals as free­
dom and democracy, there is considerable room for skepticism. The rele­
vance ofT. S. Eliot's remarks in "Tradition and the Individual Talent" about 
the historical sense are demonstrably important. Are we not as a nation 
repeating what France and Britain, Spain and Portugal, Holland and Ger­
many, did before us? And yet. do we nottend to regard ourselves as somehow 
exempt from the more sordid imperial adventures that preceded ours? 
Besides, is there not an unquestioned assumption on our pan that our 
destiny is to rule and lead the world, a destiny that we have assigned 
ourselves as part of our errand into the wilderness? 
In short, we face as a nation the deep, profoundly perturbed and perturb­
ing question of our relationship to others--other cultures, stares, histories, 
experiences, traditions, peoples, and destinies. There is no Archimedean 
point beyond the question from which to answer it; there is no vantage 
outside the actuality of relationships among cultures, among unequal impe­
rial an4 non-imperial powers, among us and others; no one has the episte­
mological privilege of somehow judging, evaluating, and interpreting the 
world free from the encumbering interests and engagements of the ongoing 
relationships themselves. We are, so to speak, of the connections, not outside 
and beyond them. And it behooves us as intellectuals and humanists and OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
secular critics to understand the United States in the world of nations and 
power from within the actuality, as panicipants in it, not detached outside 
observers who, like Oliver Goldsmith, in Yeats's perfect phrase, deliberately 
sip at the honeypots of our minds. 
Contemporary travails in recent European and American anthropology 
reflect these conundrums and embroilments in a symptomatic and interest­
ing way. That cultural practice and intellectual activity carry, as a major 
constitutive element, an unequal relationship of force between the outside 
Western ethnographer-observer and the primitive, or at least different, but 
certainly weaker and less developed non-European, non-Western person. In 
the extraordinarily rich text of Kim, Kipling extrapolates the political mea~­
ing of that relationship and embodies it.in the figure of Colonel Creighton, 
an ethnographer in charge of the Survey of India, also the head of British 
intelligence services in India, the "Great Game" to which young Kim 
belongs. Modern Western anthropology frequently repeated that prob­
lematic relationship, and in recent works of a number of theoreticians deals 
with the almost insuperable contradiction between a political actuality based 
on force, and a scientific and humane desire to understand the Other her­
meneutically and sympathetically in modes not influenced by force. 
Whether these effons succeed or fail is a less interesting matter than what 
distinguishes them, what makes them possible: an acute and embarrassed 
awareness of the all-pervasive, unavoidable imperial setting. In fact, there is 
no way that I know of apprehending the world from within American 
culture (with a whole history of exterminism and incorporation behind it) 
without also apprehending the imperial contest itself. This, I would say, is 
a cultural fact of extraordinary political as well as interpretative importance, 
yet it has not been recognized as such in cultural and literary theory, and 
is routinely circumvented or occluded in cultural discour~es. To read most 
cultural deconstructionists, or Marxists, or new historicists is to read writers 
whose political horizon, whose historical location is within a society and 
culture deeply enmeshed in imperial domination. Yet little notice is taken 
of this horizon, few acknowledgements of the setting are advanced, little 
realization of the imperial closure itself is allowed for. Instead, one has the 
impression that interpretation of other cultures, texts, and peoples--which 
at bottom is what all interpretation is about--occurs in a timeless vacuum, 
so forgiving and permissive as to deliver the interpretation directly into a 
universalism free from attachment, inhibition, and interest 
We live of course in a world not only of commodities but also of represen­
tation, and representations-their production, circulation, history, and in­
terpretation-are the very element of culture. In much recent theory the 
problem of representation is deemed to be central, yet rarely is it put in its Connecting Empire to Secular Interpretation 57 
full political context, a context that is primarily imperial. Instead we have 
on the one hand an isolated cultural sphere, believed to be freely and 
unconditionally available to weightless theoretical speculation and investi­
gation, agd, on the other, a debased political sphere, where the real struggle 
between interests is supposed to occur. To the professional sturl,ent of 
culture--the humanist, the critic, the scholar-only one sphere is relevant, 
and, more to the point, it is accepted that the two spheres are separated, 
whereas the two are not only connected but ultimately the same. 
A radical falsification has become established in this separation. Culture 
is exonerated of any entangl~ments with power, representations are consid­
ered only as apolitical images to be parsed and construed as so many 
grammars of exchange, and the divorce of the present from the past is 
assumed to be complete. And yet, far from this separation of spheres being 
a neutral or accidental choice, its real meaning is as an act of complicity, the 
humanist's choice of a disguised, denuded, systematically purged textual 
model over a more embattled model, whose principal features would inevi­
tably coalesce around the continuing struggle over the question of empire 
itsel£ 
Let me put this differently, using examples that will be familiar to every­
one. For at least a decade, there has been a decently earnest debate in the 
United States over the meaning, contents, and goals of liberal education. 
Much but not all of this debate was stimulated in the university after the 
. upheavals of the 196os, when it appeared for the first time in this century that 
the structure, authority, and tradition of American education were chal­
lenged by marauding energies, released by socially and intellectually in­
spired provocations. The newer currents in the academy, and the force of 
what is called theory (a rubric under which were herded many new disci­
plines like psychoanalysis, linguistics, and Nietzschean philosophy, un­
housed from the traditional fields such as philology, moral philosophy, and 
the natural sciences), acquired prestige and interest; they appeared to under­
mine the authority and the stability of established canons, well-capitalized 
fields, long-standing procedures of accreditation, research, and the division 
of intellectual labor. That all this occurred in the modest and circumscribed 
terrain of cultural-academic praxis simultaneously with the great wave of 
anti-war, anti-imperialist protest was not fortuitous but, rather, a genuine 
political and intellectual conjuncture. 
There is considerable irony that our search in the metropolis for a newly 
invigorated, reclaimed tradition follows the exhaustion of modernism and is 
expressed variously as post-modernism or, as I said earlier, citing Lyotard, 
as the loss of the legitimizing power ?fthe narratives ofWestern emancipa­
tion and enlightenment; simultaneously, modernism is rediscovered in the OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
formerly colonized, peripheral world, where resistance, the logic of daring, 
and various investigations of age-old tradition (a/-Turath, in the Islamic 
world) together set the tone. 
One response in the West to the new conjunctures, then, has been pro­
foundly reactionary: the effort to reassert old authorities and canons, the 
effort to reinstate ten or twenty or thirty essential Western books without 
which a Westerner would not be educated-these efforts are couched in the 
rhetoric of embattled patriotism. 
But there can be another response, worth returning to here, for it offers 
an important theoretical opportunity. Cultural experience or indeed every 
. cultural form is radically, quintessentially hybrid, and if it has been the 
practice in the West since Immanuel Kant to isolate cultural and aesthetic 
realms from the worldly domain, it is now time to rejoin them. This is by 
no means a simple matter, since--1 believe--it has been the essence of 
experience in the West at least since the late eighteenth century not only 
to acquire distant domination and reinforce hegemony, but also to divide the 
realms of culture and experience into apparently separate spheres. Entities 
such as races and nations, essences such as Englishness or Orientalism, 
modes of production such as the Asiatic or Occidental, all of these in my 
opinion testify to an ideology whose cultural correlatives well precede the 
actual accumulation of imperial territories world-wide. 
Most historians of empire speak of the "age of empire" as formally 
beginning around 1878, with "the scramble for Africa." A closer look at the 
cultural actuality reveals a much earlier, more deeply and stubbornly held 
view about overseas European hegemony; we can locate a coherent, fully 
mobilized system of ideas near the end of the eighteenth century, and there 
follows the set of integral developments such as the first great systematic 
conquests under Napoleon, the rise of nationalism and the European nation­
state, the advent of large-scale industrialization, and the consolidation of 
power in the bourgeoisie. This is also the period in which the novel form 
and the new historical narrative become pre-eminent, and in which the 
importance of subjectivity to historical time takes firm hold. 
Yet most culroral historians, and certainly all literary scholars, have failed 
to remark the geographical notation, the theoretical mapping and charting of 
territory that underlies Western fiction, historical writing, and philosophical 
discourse of the time. There is first the authority of the European observer­
traveller, merchant, scholar, historian, novelist Then there is the hierarchy 
of spaces by which the metropolitan center and, gradually, the metropolitan 
economy are seen as dependent upon an overseas system of territorial 
control, economic exploitation, and a socio-cultural vision; without these 
stability and prosperity at home--"home" being a word with extremely Connecting Empire to Secular-lnterpraation 59 
potent resonances--would not be possible. The perfect example of what I 
mean is to he found in Jane Austen's Manrfield Park, in which Thomas 
Bertram's slave plantation in Antigua is mysteriously necessary to the poise 
and the beauty of Mansfield Park, a place described in moral and aesthetic 
terms well before the scramble for Africa, or before the age of empire 
officially began. As John Stuart Mill puts it in the Principle! of Political 
Economy:, 
These (outlying possessions of ours] are hardly to he looked upon as 
countries, ... hut more properly as outlying agricultural or manufactur­
ing estates belonging to a larger community. Our West Indian colonies, 
for example, cannot he regarded as countries with a productive capital 
of their own· ... [hut are rather] the place where England finds it , 
convenient to carry on the production of sugar, coffee and a few other 
tropical commodities.SJ 
Read this extraordinary passage together with Jane Austen, and a much 
less benign picture stands forth than the usual one of cultural formations in 
the pre-imperialist age. In Mill we have the ruthless proprietary tones of the 
white master used to effacing the reality, work, and suffering of millions of 
slaves, transported across the middle passage, reduced only to an incorpo­
rated status "for the benefit of the proprietors." These colonies are, Mill says, 
to he considered as hardly anything more than a convenience, an attitude 
confirmed by Austen, who in Manrfteld Park sublimates the agonies of Carib­
bean existence to a mere half dozen passing references to Antigua. And 
much the same processes occur in other canonical writers of Britain and 
France; in short, the metropolis gets its authority to a considerable extent 
from the devaluation as well as the exploitation of the outlying colonial 
possession. (Not for nothing, then, did Walter Rodney entitle his great 
decolonizing treatise of 197~ HIYW Europe Underdeveloped Africa.) 
Lastly, the authority of the observer, and of European geographical cen­
trality, is buttressed by a cultural discourse relegating and confining the 
non-European to a secondary racial, cultura~ ontological status. Yet this 
secondariness is, paradoxically, essential to the primariness of the European; 
this of course is the paradox explored by Cesaire, Fanon, and Memmi, and 
it is hut one among many of the ironies of modern critical theory that it has 
rarely been explored by investigators of the aporias and impossibilities of 
reading. Perhaps that is because it places emphasis not so much on hiYW to 
read, hut rather on what is read and where it is written about and represented. 
It is to Conrad's enormous credit to have sounded in such a complex and 
riven prose the authentic imperialist note--how you supply the forces of 6o OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES 
world-wide accumulation and rule with a self-confirming ideological motor 
(what Marlow in Heart of Darkness calls efficiency with devotion to an idea 
at the back of it, "it" being the taking away of the earth from those ·with 
darker complexions and flatter noses) and simultaneously draw a screen 
across the process, saying that art and culture have nothing to do with "it." 
What to read and what to do with that reading, that is the full form of the 
question. All the energies poured into critical theory, into novel and demys­
tifying theoretical praxes like the new historicism and deconstruction and 
Marxism have avoided the major, I would say determining, political horizon 
of modern Western culture, namely imperialism. This massive avoidance 
has sustained a canonical inclusion and exclusion; you include the Rous--
sea us, the Nietzsches, the W ordsworths, the Dickenses, Flauberts, and so on, 
and at the same you exclude their relationships with the protracted, com­
plex, and striated work of empire. But why is this a matter of what to read 
and about where? Very simply, because critical discourse has taken no 
cognizance of the enormously exciting, varied post-colonial literature pro­
duced in resistance to the imperialist expansion of Europe and the United 
States in the past two centuries. To read Austen without also reading Fanon 
and Cabral-and so on and on--is to disaffiliate modern culture from its 
engagements and attachments. That is a process that should be reversed. 
But there is more to be done. Critical theory and literary historical 
scholarship have reinterpreted and revalidated major swatches of Western 
literature, art, and philosophy. Much of this has been exciting and power­
ful work, even though one often senses more an energy of elaboration and 
refinement than a committed engagement to what I would call secular and 
affiliated criticism; such criticism cannot be undertaken without a fairly 
strong sense of how consciously chosen historical models are relevant to 
social and intellectual change. Yet if you read and interpret modern Euro­
pean and American culture as having had something to do with imperial­
ism, it becomes incumbent upon you also to reinterpret the canon in the 
light of texts whose place there has been insufficiently linked to, insuffi­
ciently weighted toward the expansion of Europe. Put differently, this pro­
cedure entails reading the canon as a polyphonic accompaniment to the 
expansion of Europe, giving a revised direction and valence to writers 
such as Conrad and Kipling, who have always been read as sports, not as 
writers whose manifestly imperialist subject matter has a long subterra­
nean or implicit and proleptic life in the earlier work of writers like, say, 
Austen or Chateaubriand. 
Second, theoretical work must begin to formulate the relationship be­
tween empire and culture. There have been a few milestone~Kiernan's 
work, for instance, and Martin Green's--but concern with the issue has not Connecting Empire to Secular-· Interpretation 61 
been intense. Things, however, are beginning to change,. as I noted earlier. 
A whole range of work in other disciplines, a new group of often younger 
scholars and critics-here, in the Third World, in Europe-are beginning 
to embark on the theoretical and historical enterprises; many of them seem 
in one way or another to be converging on questions of imperialist discourse, 
colonialist practice, and so fonh. Theoretically we are only at the stage of 
trying to inventory the interpellation of culture by empire, but the efforts so 
far made are only slightly more than rudimentary. And as the study of 
culture extends, into the mass media, popular culture, micro-politics, and so 
fonh, the focus on modes qf power and hegemony grows sharper. 
Third, we should keep· before us the prerogatives of the present as 
signposts and paradigms for the study of the past. If I have insisted on 
integration and coimections between the past and the present,· betweep 
imperializer and imperialized, between culture and imperialism, I have done 
so not to level or reduce differences, but rather to convey a more urgent 
sense of the interdependence between things. So vast and yet so detailed is 
imperialism as an experience with crucial cultural dimensions, that we must 
speak of overlapping territories, intenwined histories common to men and 
women, whites and non-whites, dwellers in the metropolis and on the 
peripheries, past as well as present and future; these territories and histories 
can only be seen from the perspective of the whole of secular human history. CHAPTER TWO 
CONSOLIDATED VISION 
We called ourselves "Inrrusive" as a band; fur we meant to break into the 
accepted halls of English fOreign policy, and build a new people in the East, 
despite the rails laid down for us by our ancestors. 
T. E. LAWRENCE, Th• Sevm Pillars ofWirdom 
( I ) 
Narrative and Social Space 
Nearly everywhere in nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century British 
and French culture we find allusions to the facts of empire, but 
perhaps nowhere with more regularity and frequency than in the British 
novel. Taken together, these allusions constitute what I have called a struc­
ture of attitude and reference. In Mansfield Park, which within Jane Austen's 
work .carefully defines the moral and social values informing her other 
novels, references to Sir Thomas Bertram's overseas possessions are 
threaded through; they give him his wealth, occasion his absences, fix his 
social status at home and abroad, and make possible his values, to which 
Fanny Price (and Austen herself) finally subscribes. If this is a novel about 
"ordination," as Austen says, the right to colonial possessions helps directly 
to establish social order and moral priorities at home. Or again, Bertha 
Mason, Rochester's deranged wife in Jane Eyre, is a West Indian, and also a 
threatening presence, confined to an attic room. Thackeray's Joseph Sedley 
in Vanity Fair is an Indian nabob whose rambunctious behavior and excessive 
(perhaps undeserved) wealth is counterpointed with Becky's finally unac­
ceptable deviousness, which in turn is contrasted with Amelia's propriety, 
suitably rewarded in the end; joseph Dobbin is seen at the end of the novel 
engaged serenely in writing a history of the Punjab. The good ship Rose in 
Charles Kingsley's Westward Ho! wanders through the Caribbean and South 
America. In Dickens's Great Expet:tations, Abel Magwitch is the convict trans-Narrative and Soci'aJ Space 
ported to Australia whose wealth-conveniently removed from Pip's tri­
umphs as a provincial lad flourishing in London in the guise of a gentle­
man-ironically makes possible the great expectations Pip entertains. In 
many other Dickens novels businessmen have connections with the empire, 
Dombey and Quilp being two noteworthy examples. For Disraeli's Tancred 
and Eliot's Daniel Deronda, the East is partly a habitat for native. peoples (or 
immigrant European populations), but also partly incorporated under the 
sway of empire. Henry James's Ralph Touchett in Portrait of a Lady travels 
in Algeria and Egypt. And when we come to Kipling, Conrad, Arthur Conan 
Doyle, Rider Haggard, R. L. Stevenson, George Orwell, Joyce Cary, E. M. 
Forster, and T. E. Lawrence, the empire is everywhere a crucial setting. 
The situation in France was diff'erent, insofar as the French imperial 
vocation during the early nineteenth century was different from England's, 
buttressed as it was by the continuity and stability of the English polity itsel£ 
The reverses of policy, losses. of colonies, insecurity of possession, and shifts 
in philosophy that France suffered during the Revolution and the Napole­
onic era meant that its empire had a less secure identity and presence in 
French culture. In Chateaubriand and Lamartine one hears the rhetoric of 
imperial grandeur; and in painting, in historical and philological writing, in 
music and theater one has an often vivid apprehension of France's outlying 
possessions. But in the culture at large--until after the middle of the cen­
tury-there is rarely that weighty, almost philosophical sense of imperial 
mission that one finds in Britain. ' 
There is also a dense body of American writing, contemporary with this 
British and French work, which shows a peculiarly acute imperial cast, even 
though paradoxically its ferocious anti-colonialism, directed at the Old 
World, is central to it. One thinks, for example, of the Puritan "errand into 
the wilderness" and, later, of that extraordinarily obsessive concern in 
Cooper, Twain, Melville, and others with United States expansion west­
ward, along with the wholesale colonization and destruction of native Amer­
ican life (as memorably studied by Richard Slotkin, Patricia Limerick, and 
Michael P.aul Rogin); 1 an imperial motif emerges to rival the European one. 
(In Chapter Four of this book I shall deal with other and more recent aspects 
of th~ United States in its late-twentieth-century imperial form.) 
As a reference, as a point of definition, as an easily assumed place of travel, 
wealth, and service, the empire function.s for much of the European nine­
teenth century as a codified, if only marginally visible, presence in fiction, 
very much like the servants in grand households and in novels, whose work 
is taken for granted but scarcely ever more than named, rarely studied 
(though Bruce Robbins has recently written on them), 2 or given density. To 
cite another intriguing analogue, imperial possessions are as usefully there, CONSOLIDATED VISION 
anonymous and collective, as the outcast populations (analyzed by Gareth 
Stedman Jones) 3 of transient workers, part-time employees, seasonal arti­
sans; their existence always counts, though their names and identities do not, 
they are profitable without being fully there. This is a literary equivalent, in 
Eric Wolf's somewhat self-congratulatory words, of "people without His­
tory,"4 people on whom the economy and polity sustained by empire de­
pend, but whose reality has not historically or culturally required attention. 
In all of these instances the facts of empire are associated with sustained 
possession, with far-flung and sometimes unknown spaces, with eccentric or 
unacceptable human beings, with fortune-enhancing or fantasized activities 
like emigration, money-making, and sexual adventure. Disgraced younger 
sons are sent off to the colonies, shabby older relatives go there to try to 
recoup lost fortunes (as in Balzac's La Cou.fine Bette), enterprising young 
travellers go there to· sow wild oats and to collect exotica. The colonial 
territories are realms of possibility, and they have always been associated 
with the realistic novel. Robinson Crusoe is virtually unthinkable without 
the colonizing mission that permits him to create a new world of his own in 
the distant reaches of the African, Pacific, and Atlantic wilderness. But most 
of the great nineteenth-century realistic novelists are less assertive about 
colonial rule and possessions than either Defoe or late writers like Conrad 
and Kipling, during whose time great electoral reform and mass participa­
tion in politics meant that imperial competition became a more intrusive 
domestic topic. In the closing year of the nineteenth century, with the 
scramble for Africa, the consolidation of the French imperial Union, the 
American annexation of the Philippines, and British rule in the Indian 
subcontinent at its height, empire was a universal concern. 
What I should like to note is that these colonial and imperial realities are 
overlooked in criticism that has otherwise been extraordinarily thorough 
and resourceful in finding themes to discuss. The relatively few writers and 
critics who discuss the relationship between culture and empire-among 
them Martin Green, Molly Mahood, John McClure, and, in particular, 
Patrick Brantlinger-have made excellent contributions, but their mode is 
essentially narrative and descriptive--pointing out the presence of themes, 
the importance of certain historical conjunctures, the influence or persis­
tence of ideas about imperialism-and they cover huge amounts of mate­
rial.5 In almost all cases they write critically of imperialism, of that way of 
life that William Appleman Williams describes as being compatible with all 
sorts of other ideological persuasions, even antinomian ones, so that during 
the nineteenth century "imperial outreach made it necessary to develop an 
appropriate ideology" in alliance with military, economic, and political 
methods. These made it possible to "preserve and extend the empire with-Narrative and Soci'al Space 
out wasting its psychic or cultural or economic substance." There are hints 
in these scholars' work that, again to quote Williams, imperialism pro­
duces troubling self-iroages, for example, that of "a benevolent progressive 
policeman." 6 
But these critics are mainly descriptive and positivist writers strikingly 
different from the small handful of generally theoretical and ideological 
contributions-among them Jonah Raskin's The Mythology of Imperiali.rm, 
Gordon K. Lewis's Slavery, Imperialism, and Freedom, and V. G. Kiernan's 
MJJrxism and Imperialism and his crucial work, The Lords of Human Kind.' All 
these books, which owe a great deal to Marxist analysis and premises, point 
out the centrality of imperialist thought in modern Western culture. 
Yet none of them has been anywhere as influential as they should have 
been in changing our ways of looking at the canonical works of nineteenth­
and twentieth-century European culture. The major critical practitioners 
simply ignore imperialism. In recently rereading Lionel Trilling's fine little 
book on E. M. Forster, for instance, I was struck that in his otherwise 
perceptive consideration of Howards End he does not once mention imperial­
ism, which, in my reading of the book, is hard to miss, much less ignore. After 
all, Henry Wilcox and his family are colonial rubber growers: "They had the 
colonial spirit, and were always making for some spots where .the white man 
might carry his burden unobserved." 8 And Forster frequently contrasts and 
associates that fact with the changes taking place in England, changes that 
affect Leonard and Jacky Bast, the Schlegels, and Howards End itself. Or 
there is the more surprising case of Raymond Williams, whose Culture and 
Society does not deal with the imperial experience at all. (When in an 
interview Williams was challenged about this massive absence, since imperi­
alism "was not something which was secondary and external-it was abso­
lutely constitutive of the whole nature of the English political and social 
order ... the salient fact"9-he replied that his Welsh experience, which 
ought to have enabled him to think about the imperial experience, was "very 
much in abeyance" at the time he wrote Cult~re and Society.) 10 The few 
tantalizing pages in The Country and the City that touch on culture and 
imperialism are peripheral to the book's main idea. 
Why did these lapses occur? And how was the centrality of the imperial 
vision registered and supported by the culture that produced it, then to some 
extent disguised it, and also was transformed by it? Naturally, if you yourself 
happen to have a colonial background, the imperial theme is a determining 
one in your formation, and it will draw you to it if you also happen to be 
a dedicated critic of European literature. An Indian or African scholar of 
English literature reads Kim, say, or Heart of Dar/mess with a critical urgency 
not felt in quite the same way by an American or British one. But in what 66 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
way can. we formulate the relationship between culture a~d imperialism 
beyond the asseverations of personal testimony? The emergence of formerly 
colonial subjects as interpreters of imperialism and its great cultural works 
has given imperialism a perceptible, not to say obtrusive identity as a subject 
for study and vigorous revision. But how can that particular kind of post­
imperial testimony and study, usually left at the margins of critical dis­
course, be brought into active contact with current theoretical concerns? 
To regard imperial concerns as constitutively significant to the culture of 
the modern West is, I have suggested, to consider that culture from the· 
perspective provided by anti-imperialist resistance as well as pro-imperialist 
apology. What does this mean? It means remembering that Western writers 
until the middle of the twentieth century, whether Dickens and Austen, 
Flaubert or Camus, wrote with an exclusively Western audience in mind, 
even when they wrote of characters, places, or situations that referred to, 
made use of, overseas territories held by Europeans. But just because Austen 
referred to Antigua in Mantfield Park or to realms visited by the British navy 
in Persuasitm without any thought of possible responses by the Caribbean or 
Indian natives resident there is no reason for us to do the same. We now 
know that these non-European peoples did not accept with indifference the 
authority projected over them, or the general silence on which their pres­
ence in variously attenuated forms is predicated. We must therefore read the 
great canonical texts, and perhaps also the entire archive of modern and 
pre-modern European and American culture, with an effort to draw out, 
extend, give emphasis and voice to what is silent or marginally present or 
ideologically represented (I have in mind Kipling's Indian characters) in 
such works. 
In practical terms, "contrapuntal reading" as I have called it means read­
ing a text with an understanding of what is involved when an author shows, 
for instance, that a colonial sugar plantation is seen as important to the 
process of maintaining a particular style of life in England. Moreover, like 
all literary texts, these are not bounded by their formal historic beginnings 
and endings. References to Australia in David Copperfield or India in Jane Eyre 
are made because they· can be, because British power (and not just the 
novelist's fancy) made passing references to these massive appropriations 
possible; but the further lessons are no less true: that these colonies were 
subsequently liberated from direct and indirect rule, a process that began 
and unfolded while the British (or French, Portuguese, Germans, etc.) were 
still there, although as part of the effort at suppressing native nationalism 
only occasional note was taken of it. The point is that contrapuntal reading 
must take account of both processes·, that of imperialism and that of resis­
tance to it, which can be done by extending our reading of the texts to Narrative and Social Space 
include what was once forcibly excluded-in L 'Etranger, for example, the 
whole previous history of France's colonialism and its destruction of the 
Algerian state, and the later emergence of an independent Algeria (which 
Camus opposed). 
Each text has its own particular genius, as does each geographical region 
of the world, with its own overlapping experiences and interdependent 
histories of conflict. As far as the cultural work is concerned, a distinction 
between particularity and sovereignty (or hermetic exclusiveness) can use­
fully be made. Obviously no reading should try to generalize so much as to· 
efface the identity of a particular text, author, or movement. By the same 
token it should allow that what was, or appeared to be, certain for a given 
work or author may have become subject to disputation. Kipling's India, in 
Kim, has a quality of permanence and inevitability that belongs not just to 
that wonderful novel, but to British India, its history, administrators, and 
apologists and, no less important, to the India fought for by Indian national­
ists as their country to be won back. By giving an account of this series of 
pressures and counter-pressures in Kipling's India, we understand the pro­
cess of imperialism itself as the great work of art engages them, and of later 
anti-imperialist resistance. In reading a text, one must open it out both to 
what went into it and to what its author excluded. Each cultural work is a 
vision of a moment, and we must juxtapose that vision with the various 
revisions it later provoked-in this case, the nationalist experiences of 
post-independence India. 
In addition, one must connect the structures of a narrative to the ideas, 
concepts, experiences from which it draws support. Conrad's Africans, for 
example, come from a huge library of Africani.rm, so to speak, as well as from 
Conrad's personal experiences. There is no such thing as a direct experience, 
or reflection, of the world in the language of a text. Conrad's impressions of 
Africa were inevitably influenced by lore and writing about Africa, which he 
alludes to in A Per.ronal Rerord; what he supplies in Heart of Darlme.r.r is the 
result of his impressions of those texts interacting creatively, together with 
the requirements and conventions of narrative and his own special genius 
and history. To say of this extraordinarily rich mix that it "reflects" Africa, 
or even that it reflects an experience of Africa, is somewhat pusillanimous 
and surely misleading. What we have in Heart of Darkne.rs-a work of 
immense influence,' having provoked many readings and images-is a politi­
cized, ideologically saturated Africa which to some intents and purposes was 
the imperialized place, with those many interests and ideas furiously at work 
in it, not just a photographic literary "reflection" of it. 
This is, perhaps; to overstate the matter, but I want to make the point that 
far from Heart of Darkne.rs and its image of Africa being "only" literature, the 68 CONSOLIDATED VISIO.N 
work is extraordinarily caught up in, is indeed an organic part of, the 
"scramble for Africa" that was contemporary with Conrad's composition. 
True, Conrad's audience was small, and, true also, he was very critical of 
Belgian colonialism. But to most Europeans, reading a rather rarefied text 
like Heart of Darkness was often as close as they came to Africa, and in that 
limited sense it was part of the European effort to hold on to, think about, 
plan for Africa. To represent Africa is to enter the battle _over Africa, 
inevitably connected to later resistance, decolonization, and so forth. 
Works of literature, particularly those whose manifest subject is empire, 
have an inherently untidy, even unwieldy aspect in so fraught, so densely 
charged a political setting. Yet despite their formidable complexity, literary 
works like Heart of Darkness are distillations, or simplifications, or a set of 
choices made by an author that are far less messy and mixed up than the 
reality. It would not be fair to think of them as abstractions, although fictions 
such as Heart of Darkness are so elaborately fashioned by authors and so 
worried over by readers as to suit the necessities of narrativ;e which as a 
result, we must add, makes a highly specialized entry into the struggle over 
Africa. 
So hybrid, impure, and complex a text requires especially vigilant atten­
tion as it is interpreted. Modern imperialism was so global and all-encom­
passing that virtually nothing escaped it; besides, as I have said, the 
nineteenth-century contest over empire is still continuing today. Whether 
or not to look at the connections between cultural texts and imperialism is 
therefore to take a position in fact taken-either to study the connection in 
order to criticize it and think of alternatives for it, or not to study it in order 
to let it stand, unexamined and, presumably, unchanged. One of my reasons 
for writing this book is to show how far the quest for, concern about; and 
consciousness of overseas dominion extended-not just in Conrad but in 
figures we practically never think of in that connection, like Thackeray and 
Austen-and how enriching and important for the critic is attention to this 
material, not only for the obvious political reasons, but also because, as I 
have been arguing, this particular kind of attention allows the reader to 
interpret canonical nineteenth- and twentieth-century works with a newly 
engaged interest. 
Let us return to Heart of Darkness. In it Conrad offers an uncannily 
suggestive starting point for grappling at close quarters with these difficult 
matters. Recall that Marlow contrasts Roman colonizers with their modern 
counterparts in an oddly perceptive way, illuminating the special mix of 
power, ideological energy, and practical attitude characterizing European 
imperialism. The ancient Romans, he says, were "no colonists; their admin­
istration was merely a squeeze and nothing more." Such people conquered Narrative and Sociai.Space 
and did little else. By contrast, "what saves us is efficiency-the devotion to 
efficiency," unlike the Romans, who relied on brute force, which is scarcely 
more than "an accident arising from the weakness of others." Today, 
however, 
the conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from 
those who have a different complexion or slightly flatter ~oses than 
ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much. What 
redeems it is the idea only. An idea at the back of it; not a. sentimental 
pretence but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the idea-something 
·you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a sacrifice to .... 11 
In his account of his great river journey, Marlow extends the point to mark 
a distinction between Belgian rapacity and (by implication) ~ritish rational­
ity in the conduct of imperialism. u 
Salvation in this context is an interesting notion. It sets ''us" off from the 
damned, despised Romans and Belgians, whose greed radiates no benefits • 
onto either their consciences or the lands and bodies of their subjects. "We" 
are saved because first of all we needn't look directly at the results of what 
we do; we are ringed by and ring ourselves with the practice of efficiency, 
by which land and people are put to use completely; the territory and its 
inhabitants are totally incorporated by our rule, which in tum totally incor­
porates us as we respond efficiently to its exigencies. Further, through 
Marlow, Conrad speaks of redemption, a step in a sense beyond salvation. 
If salvation saves us1 saves time and money, and also saves us from the ruin 
of mere short-term conquest, then redemption extends salvation further still. 
Redemption is found in the self-justifying practice of an idea or mission over 
time, in a structure that completely encircles and is revered by you, even 
though you set up the structure in the first place, ironically enough, and no 
longer study it closely because you take it for granted. 
Thus Conrad encapsulates two quite different but intimately related 
aspects of imperialism: the idea that is based on the power to take over 
territory, an idea utterly clear in its force and unmistakable consequences; 
and the practice that essentially disguises or obscures this by developing a 
justificatory regime of self-aggrandizing, self-originating authority inter­
posed between the victim of imperialism and its perpetrator. 
We would completely miss the tremendous power of this argument if we 
were merely to lift it out of Heart of Darkness, like a message out of a bottle. 
Conrad's argument is inscribed right in the very form of narrative as he 
inherited it and as he practiced it. Without empire, I would go so far as 
saying, there is no European novel as we know it, and indeed if we study the CONSOLIDATED VISIO'N 
impulses giving rise to it, we shall see the far from accidental convergence 
between the patterns of narrative authority constitutive of the novel on the 
one hand, and, on the other, a complex ideological configuration underlying 
the tendency to imperialism. 
Every novelist and every critic or theorist of the European novel notes its 
institutional character. The novel is fundamentally tied to bourgeois society; 
in Charles Moraze's phrase, it accompanies and indeed is a part of the 
conquest of Western society by what he calls le.r bourgeoi.r conquerant.r. No less 
significantly, the novel is inaugurated in England by Robin.ron Cru.roe, a work 
whose protagonist is the founder of a new world, which he rules and reclaims 
for Christianity and England. True, whereas Crusoe is explicitly enabled by 
an ideology of overseas expansion--directly connected in style and form to 
the narratives of sixteenth- and seventeenth~century exploration voyages 
that laid the foundations of the great colonial empires--the major novels 
that come after Defoe, and even Defoe's later works, seem not to be single­
mindedly compelled by the exciting overseas prospects. Captain Singleton is 
the story of a widely travelled pirate in India and Africa, and Moll Flander.r 
is shaped by the possibility in the New World of the heroine's climactic 
redemption from a life of crime, but Fielding, Richardson, Smollett, and 
Sterne do not connect their narratives so directly to the act of accumulating 
riches and territories abroad. · 
These novelists do, however, situate their work in and derive it from a 
carefuUy surveyed territorial greater Britain, and that i.r related to what 
Defoe so presciently began. Yet while distinguished studies of eighteenth­
century English fiction--by Ian Watt, Lennard Davis, John Richetti, and 
Michael McKeon-have devoted considerable attention to the relationship 
between the novel and social space, the imperial perspective has been 
neglected.u This is not simply a matter of being uncertain whether, for 
example, Richardson's minute constructions of bourgeois seduction and 
rapacity actually relate to British military moves against the French in India 
occurring at the same time. Quite clearly they do not in a literal sense; but 
in both realms we find common values about contest, surmounting odds and 
obstacles, and patience in establishing authority through the art of connect­
ing principle with profit over rime. In other words, we need to have a critical 
sense ofhow the great spaces of Clari.r.ra or Tom Jone.r are two things together: 
a domestic accompaniment to the imperial project for presence and control 
abroad, and a practical narrative about expanding and moving about in space 
that must be actively inhabited and enjoyed before its discipline or limits can 
be accepted. 
I am not trying to say that the novel-or the culture in the broad 
sense--"caused" imperialism, but that the novel, as a culturai·anefll.ct of Narrative and Social Space 
bourgeois society, and imperialism are unthinkable without each other. Of 
all the major literary forms, the novel is the most recent, its emergence the 
most datable, its occurrence the most Western, its normative pattern of 
social authority the most structured; imperialism and the novel fortified each 
other to such a degree that it is impossible, I would argue, to read one 
without in some way dealing with the other. 
Nor is this all. The novel is an incorporative, quasi-encyclopedic cultural 
form. Packed into it are both a highly regulated plot mechanism and an 
entire system of social reference that depends on the· existing institutions of 
bourgeois society, their authority and power. The novelistic hero and hero­
ine exhibit the restlessness and ·energy characteristic of the enterprising 
bourgeoisie, and they are permitted adventures in which their experiences 
reveal to them the limits of what they can aspire to, where they can go, what 
they can become. Novels therefore end either with the death of a hero or 
heroine Uulien Sorel, Emma Bovary, Bazarov, Jude the Obscure) who by 
virtue of overflowing energy does not tit into the orderly scheme of things, 
or with the protagonists' accession to stability (usually in the form of mar­
riage or confirmed identity, as is the case with novels of Austen, Dickens, 
Thackeray, and George Eliot). 
But, one might ask, why give so much emphasis to novels, and to England? 
And how can we bridge the distance separating this solitary aesthetic form 
from large topics and undertakings like "culture" or "imperialism"? For one 
thing, by the time of World War One the British empire had become 
unquestionably dominant, the result of a process that had started in the late. 
sixteenth century; so powerful was the process and so definitive its result 
that, as Seeley and Hobson argued toward the end of the nineteenth century, 
it was the central fact in British history, and one that included many dispar­
ate activities. 14 It is not entirely coincidental that Britain also produced and 
sustained a novelistic institution with no real European competitor or equiv­
alent. France had more highly developed intellectual institutions-acade­
mies, universities, institutes, journals, and so on-for at least the first half of 
the nineteenth century, as a host of British intellectuals, including Arnold, 
Carlyle, Mill, and George Eliot, noted and lamented. But the extraordinary 
compensation for this discrepancy came in the steady rise and gradually 
undisputed domin.ance of the British novel. (Only as North Africa assumes 
a sort of metropolitan presence in French culture after 187o do we see a 
comparable aesthetic and cultural formation begin to flow: this is the period 
when Loti, the early Gide, Daudet, Maupassant, Mille, Psichari, Malraux, 
the exoticists like Segalen, and of course Camus project a global concor­
dance between the domestic and imperial situations.) 
By· the 184os the English novel had achieved eminence as the aesthetic 72 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
form and as a major intellectual voice, so to speak, in English society. 
Because the novel gained so important a place in "the condition of England" 
question, for example, we can see it also as participating in England's 
overseas empire. In projecting what Raymond Williams calls a "know­
able community" of Englishmen and women, Jane Austen, George Eliot, 
and Mrs. Gaskell shaped the idea of England in such a way as to give it 
identity, presence, ways of reusable articulation. 15 And part of such an idea 
was the relationship between "home" and "abroad." Thus England was 
surveyed, evaluated, made known, whereas "abroad" was only referred to 
or shown briefly without the kind of presence or immediacy lavished on 
London, the countryside, or northern industrial centers such as Manchester 
or Birmingham. 
This steady, almost reassuring work done by the novel is unique to 
England and has to be taken as an important cultural affiliation domestically 
speaking, as yet undocumented and unstudied, for what took place in India, 
Africa, Ireland, or the Caribbean. An analogy is the relationship between 
Britain's foreign policy and its finance and trade, a relationship which has 
been studied. We get a lively sense of how dense and complex it was from 
D.C.M. Platt's classic (but still debated) srudy of it, Finance, Trade and Politics 
in British Foreigp Policy, rSIJ-IJJI4> and how much the extraordinary twinning 
of British trade and imperial expansion depended on cult)Jral and social 
factors such as education, journalism, intermarriage, and class. Platt speaks 
of "social and intellectual contact [friendship, hospitality, mutual aid, com­
mon social and educational background] which energized the actual pres­
sure on British foreign policy," and he goes on to say that "concrete evidence 
[for the actual accomplishments of this set of contacts] has probably never 
existed." Nevertheless, if one looks at how the government's attitude to such 
issues as "foreign loans ... the protection of bondholders, and the promotion 
of contracts and concessions overseas" developed, one can see what he calls 
a "departmental view," a sort of consensus about the empire held by a whole 
range of people responsible for it This would "suggest how officials and 
politicians were likely to react" 16 
How best to characterize this view? There seems to be agreement among 
scholars that until about 187o British policy was (according to the early 
Disraeli, for example) not to expand the empire but "to uphold and maintain 
it and to protect it from disintegration." 17 Central to this task was India, 
which acquired a status of astonishing durability in "departmental" thought. 
After 187o (Schumpeter cites Disraeli's Crystal Palace speech in 1872 as the 
hallmark of aggressive imperialism, "the catch phrase of domestic policy") 18 
protecting India (the parameters kept getting larger) and defending against 
other competing powers, e.g., Russia, necessitated British imperial expansion Na"ative and Social Space 73 
in Africa, and the Middle and Far East. Thereafter, in one area of the -globe 
after another, "Britain was indeed preoccupied with holding what she al­
ready had," as Platt puts it, "and whatever she gained was demanded because 
it helped her to preserve the rest. She belonged to the party of Jes satisfoits, 
but she had to fight ever harder to stay with them, and she had by far the 
most to lose."19 A "departmental view" of British policy was fundamentally 
careful; as Ronald Robinson and John Gallagher put it in their redefinition 
of Platt's "thesis, "the British would expand by trade and influence if they 
could, but by imperial rule if they must." 20 We should not minimize or 
f.orget, they remind us, that the Indian army was used in China three times 
between 1829 and 1856, at least once in Persia (1856), Ethiopia and Singapore 
(186y), Hong Kong (1868), Afghanistan (1878), Egypt (1882), Burma (188s), 
Ngasse (1893), Sudan and Uganda (1896). -
In addition to India, British policy obviously made the bulwark for impe­
rial commerce mainland Britain itself (with Ireland a continuous colonial 
problem), as well as the so-called white colonies (Australia, New Zealand, 
Canada, South Africa, and even the former American possessions). Continu­
ous investment and routine conservation of Britain's overseas and home 
territories were without significant parallel in other European or American 
powers, where lurches, sudden acquisitions or losses, and improvisations 
occurred far more frequendy. · 
In short, British power was durable and continually reinforced. In the 
related and often adjacent cultural sphere, that power was elaborated and 
articulated in the novel, whose central continuous presence is not compara­
bly to be found elsewhere. But we must be as fastidious as possible. A novel 
is neither a frigate nor a bank draft. A novel exists first as a novelist's effort 
and second as an object read by an audience. In time novels accumulate and 
become what Harry Levin has usefully called an institution ofliteramre, but 
they do not ever lose either their status as events or their specific density as 
part of a continuous enterprise recognized and accepted as such by readers 
and other writers. But for all their social presence, novels are not reducible 
to a sociological current and cannot be done justice to aesthetically, cultur­
ally, and politically as subsidiary forms of class, ideology, or interest. 
Equally, however, novels are not simply the product of lonely genius (as 
a school of mod~rn interpreters like Helen Vendler try to suggest), to be 
regarded only as manifestations of unconditioned creativity. Some of the 
most exciting recent criticism--Fredric Jameson's The Political Unconscious 
and David Miller's The Novel and the Police are two celebrated examples 21-
shows the novel generally, and narrative in particular, to have a sort of 
regulatory social presence in West European societies. Yet missing from 
these otherwise valuable descriptions are adumbrations of the actual world 74 ·coNSOLIDATED VISION 
in which the novels and narratives take place. Being an English writer meant 
something quite specific and different from, say, being a French or Por­
tuguese writer. For the British writer, "abroad" was felt vaguely and ineptly 
to be out there, or exotic and strange, or in some way or other "ours" to 
control, trade in "freely," or suppress when the natives were energized into 
overt military or political resistance. The novel contributed significantly to 
these feelings, attitudes, and references and became a main element in the 
consolidated vision, or departmental cultural view, of the globe. 
I should specify how the novelistic contribution was made and also, 
conversely, how the novel neither deterred nor inhibited the more aggres­
sive and popular imperialist feelings manifest after 188o.22 Novels are pic­
tures of reality at the very early' or the very late stage in the reader's 
experience of them: in fact they elaborate and maintain a reality they inherit 
from other novels, which they rearticulate and repopulate according to their 
creator's situation, gifts, predilections. Platt rightly stresses conservation in the 
"departmental view"; this is significant for the novelist, too: the nineteenth­
century English novels stress the continuing existence (as opposed to revo­
lutionary overturning) of England. Moreover, they never advocate giving up 
colonies, but take the long-range view that since they fall within the orbit 
of British dominance, that dominance is a sort of norm, and thus conserved 
along with the colonies. 
What we have is a slowly built up picture with England-socially, politi­
cally, morally charted and differentiated in immensely fine detail-at the 
center and a series of overseas territories connected to it at the peripheries. 
The continuity of British imperial policy throughout the nineteenth cen­
tury-in fact a narrative-is actively accompanied by this novelistic pro­
cess, whose main purpose is not to raise more questions, not to disturb or 
otherwise preoccupy attention, but to keep the empire more or less in place. 
Hardly ever is the novelist interested in doing a great deal more than 
mentioning or referring to India, for example, in Vanity Fair and :lane Eyre, 
or' Australia in Great Expectations. The idea is that (following the general 
principles of free trade) outlying territories are available for use, at will, at 
the novelist's discretion, usually for relatively simple purposes such as 
immigration, fortune, or exile. At the end of Hard Times, for example, Tom 
is shipped off to the colonies. Not until well after mid-century did the 
empire become a principal subject of attention in writers like Haggard, 
Kipling, Doyle, Conrad as well as in emerging discourses in ethnography, 
colonial administration, theory and economy, the historiography of non­
European regions, and specialized subjects like Orientalism, exoticism, and 
mass psychology. 
The actual interpretative consequences of this slow and steady structure Narrative and Social Space 75 
of attitude and reference aniculated by the novel are diverse. I shall specify 
four. The first is that, in literary history, an unusual organic continuity can 
be seen between the earlier narratives that are normally not considered to 
have much to do with empire and the later ones explicitly about it. Kipling 
and Conrad are prepared for by Austen and Thackeray, Defoe, Scott, and 
Dickens; they are also interestingly connected with their contemporaries 
like Hardy and James, regularly supposed to be only coincidentally as­
sociated with the overseas exhibits presented by their rather more peculiar 
novelistic counterparts. But both th.e formal characteristics and ·the contents 
of all these novelists' works belong to the same cultural formation, the 
differences being those of inflection, emphasis, stress. 
Second, the structure of attitude and reference raises the whole question 
of power. Today's critic cannot and should not suddenly give a novel 
legislative or direct political authority: we must continue to remember that 
novels participate in, are pan of, contribute to an extremely slow, in­
finitesimal politics that clarifies, reinforces, perhaps even occasionally ad­
vances perceptions and attitudes about England and the world. It is striking 
that never, in the novd, is that world beyond seen except as subordinate and 
dominated, the English presence viewed as regulative and normative. Pan 
of the extraordinary novelty of Aziz's trial in A Passage tfJ India is that Forster 
admits that "the flimsy framework of the coun"l 3 cannot be sustained be­
cause it is a "fantasy" that compromises British power (real) with impanial 
justice for Indians (unreal). Therefore he readily (even with a son of frus­
trated impatience) dissolves the scene into India's "complexity," which 
twenty-four years before in Kipling's Kim was just as present. The main 
difference between the two is that the impinging disturbance of resisting 
natives had been thrust on Forster's awareness. Forster could not ignore 
something that Kipling easily incorporated (as when he rendered even the 
famous "Mutiny" of 1857 as mere waywardness, not as a serious Indian 
objection to British rule). 
There can be no awareness that the novel underscores and accepts the 
disparity in power unless readers actually register the signs in individual 
works, and unless the history of the novel is seen to have the coherence of 
a continuous enterprise. Just as the sustained solidity and largely unwaver­
ing "departmental view" of Britain's outlying territories were maintained 
throughout the nineteenth century, so too, in an altogether literary way, was 
the aesthetic (hence cultural) grasp of overseas lands maintained as a part of 
the novel, sometimes incidental, sometimes very important. Its "con­
solidated vision" came in a whole series of overlapping affirmations, by 
which a near unanimity of view was sustained. That this was done within the 
terms of each medium or discourse (the novel, travel writing, ethnography) CONSOLIDATED VISION 
and not in terms imposed from 'outside, suggests conformity, collaboration, 
willingness but not necessarily an overtly or explicitly held political agenda, 
at least not until later in the century, when the imperial program was itself 
more explicit and more a matter of direct popular propaganda. 
A third point can best be made by rapid illustration. All through Vanity 
Fair there are allusions to India, but none is anything more than incidental 
to the changes in Becky's fortunes, or in Dobbin's, Joseph's, and Amelia's 
positions. All along, though, we are made aware of the mounting contest 
between England and Napoleon, with its climax at Waterloo. This overseas. 
dimension scarcely makes Vanity Fair a novel exploiting what Henry James 
was "later to call "the international theme," any more than Thackeray be­
longs to the club of Gothic novelists like Walpole, Radcliffe, or Lewis who 
set their works rather fancifully abroad. Yet Thackeray and, I would argue, 
all the major English novelists of the mid-nineteenth century, accepted a 
globalized world-view and indeed could not (in most cases did not) ignore 
the vast overseas reach of British power. As we saw in the little example 
cited earlier from Dombey and Son, the domestic order was tied to, located in, 
even illuminated by a specifically English order abroad Whether it is Sir 
Thomas Bertram's plantation in Antigua or, a hundred years later, the 
Wilcox Nigerian rubber estate, novelists aligned the holding of power and 
privilege abroad with comparable activities at home. 
When we read the novels attentively, we get a far more discriminating 
and subtle view than the baldly "global" and imperial vision I have described 
thus far. This brings me to the fourth consequence of what I have been 
calling the structure of attitude and reference. In insisting on the integrity 
of an artistic work, as we must, and refusing to collapse the various contribu­
tions of individual authors into a general scheme, we must accept that the 
structure connecting novels to one another has no existence outside the 
novels themselves, whiCh means that one gets the particular, concrete expe­
i-ien<:e of"abroad" only in individual noyels; conversely that only individual 
novels can animate, articulate, embody the relationship, for instance, be­
tween England and Africa. This obliges critics to read and analyze, rather 
than only to summarize and judge, works whose paraphrasable content they 
might regard as politically and morally objectionable. On the one hand, 
when in a celebrated essay Chinua Achebe criticizes Conrad's racism, he 
either says nothing about or overrides the limitations placed on Conrad by 
the novel as an aesthetic form. On the other hahd, Achebe shows that he 
understands how the form works when, in some of his own novels, he 
rewrites--painstakingly and with originality--Conrad. 24 
All of this is especially true of English fiction because only England had 
an overseas empire that sustained and protected itself over such an area, for Narrative and Social Space 77 
such a long time, with such envied eminence. It is true that France rivalled 
it, but, as I have said elsewhere, the French imperial consciousness is inter­
mittent until the late nineteenth century, the actuality too impinged on by 
England, too lagging in system, profit, extent. In the main, though, the 
nineteenth-century European novel is a cultural form consolidating but also 
refining and articulating the authority of the status 'fUO. However much 
Dickens, for example, stirs up his readers against the legal system, provincial 
schools, or the bureaucracy, his novels finally enact what one critic has called 
a "fiction of resolution." 25 The most frequent figure for this is the reunifica­
tion of the family, which in Dickens's case always serves as a microcosm of 
society. In Austen, Balzac, George Eliot, and Flaubert-to take several 
prominent names together-the consolidation of authority includes, indeed 
is built into the very fabric of, both private property and marriage, institu­
tions that are only rarely challenged. 
The crucial aspect of what I have been calling the novel's consolidation 
of authority is not simply connected to the functioning of social power and 
governance, but made to appear both normative and sovereign, that is, 
self-validating in the course of the narrative. This is paradoxical only if one 
forgets that the constitution of a narrative subject, however abnormal or 
unusual, is still a social act par excellence, and as such has behind or inside it 
the authority of history and society. There is first the authority of the 
author-someone writing out the processes of society in an acceptable 
institutionalized manner, observing conventions,· following patterns, and so 
forth. Then there· is the authority of the narrator, whose discourse anchors 
the narrative in recognizable, and hence existentially referential, circum­
stances. Last, there is what might be called the authority of the community, 
whose representative most often is the family but also is the nation, the 
specific locality, and the concrete historical moment. Together these func­
tioned most energetically, most noticeably, during the early nineteenth 
century as the novel opened up to history in an unprecedented way. Con­
rad's Marlow inherits all this directly. 
Lukacs studied with remarkable skill the emergence of history in the 
European noveJ2 6-how Stendhal and particularly Scott place their narra­
tives in and as part of a public history, making that history accessible to 
everyone and not, as before, only to kings and aristocrats. The novel is thus 
a concretely historical narrative shaped by the real history of real 'nations. 
Defoe locates Crusoe on an unnamed island somewhere in an outlying 
region, and Moll is sent to the vaguely apprehended Carolinas, but Thomas 
Bertram and Joseph Sedley derive specific wealth and specific benefits from 
historically annexed territories-the Caribbean and India, respectively-at 
specific historical moments. And, as Lukacs shows so persuasively, Scott CONSOLIDATED VISION 
constructs the British polity in the form of a historical society working its 
way out offoreign adventures 27 (the Crusades, for example) and internecine 
domestic conflict (the 1745 rebellion, the warring Highland tribes) to become 
the settled metropolis resisting local revolution and·continental provocation 
with equal success. In France, history confirms the post-revolutionary reac­
tion embodied by the Bourbon restoration, and Stendhal c::hronicles its--to 
him-lamentable achievements. Later Flaubert does much the same for 18~. 
But the novel is assisted also by the historical work of Michelet and Macau­
lay, whose narratives add density to the texture of national identity. 
The appropriation of history, the historicization of the past, the narrativi­
zation of society, all of which give the novel its force, include the accumula­
tion and differentiation of social space, space to be used for social purposes. 
This is much more apparent in late-nineteenth-century, openly colonial 
fiction: in Kipling's India, for example, where the natiyes and the Raj inhabit 
differently ordained spaces, and where with his extraordinary genius Kipling 
devised Kim, a marvelous character whose youth and energy allow him to 
explore both spaces, crossing from one to the other with daring grace as if 
to confound the authority of colonial barriers. The barriers within social 
space exist in Conrad too, and in Haggard, in Loti, in Doyle, in Gide, 
Psichari, Malraux, Camus, an~ Orwell. 
Underlying social space are territories, lands, geographical domains, the 
actual geographical underpinnings of the imperial, and also the cultural 
contest. To think about distant places, to colonize them, to populate or 
depopulate them: all of this occurs on, about, or because of land. The actual 
geographical possession of land is what empire in the final analysis is all 
about. At the moment when a coincidence occurs between real control and 
power, the idea of what a given place was (could be, might become), and an 
actual place-at that moment the struggle for empire is launched. This 
coincidence is the logic both for Westerners taking possession of land and, 
during decolonization, for resisting natives reclaiming it. Imperialism and 
the culture associated with it affirm both the primacy of geography and an 
ideology about control of territory. The geographical sense makes projec­
tions--imaginative, cartographic, military, eco,nomic, historical, or in a gen­
eral sense cultural. It also makes possible the construction of various kinds 
of knowledge, all of them in one way or another dependent upon the 
perceived character and destiny of a particular geography. · 
Three fairly restricted points should be made here. First, the spatial 
differentiations so apparent in late7nineteenth-century novels do not simply 
and suddenly appear there as a passive reflection of an aggressive "age of 
empire," but are derived in a continuum from earlier social discriminations 
already authorized in earlier historical and realistic novels. Narrative and Social Space 79 
Jane Austen sees the legitimacy of Sir Thomas Bertram's overseas proper­
ties as a natural extension of the calm, the order, the beauties of Mansfield 
Park, one central estate validating the economically supportive role of the 
peripheral other. And even where colonies are not insistently or even per­
ceptibly in evidence, the narrative sanctions a spatial moral order, whether 
in the communal restoration of the town of Middlemarch centrally impor­
tant during a period of national turbulence, or in the outlying spaces of 
deviation and uncertainty seen by Dickens in London's underworld, or in 
the Bronte stormy heights. 
A second point. As the conclusions of the novel confirm and highlight an 
underlying hierarchy of family, property, nation, there is also a very strong 
spatial hereness imparted to the hierarchy. The astounding power of the 
scene in Bleak House where Lady Dedlock is seen sobbing at the grave of her 
long dead husband grounds what we have felt about her secret past-her cold 
and inhuman presence, her disturbingly unfertile authority-in the grave­
yard to which as a fugitive she has fl.ed. This contrasts not only with the 
disorderly jumble of the Jellyby establishment (with its eccentric ties to 
Africa), but also with the favored house in which Esther and her guardian­
husband live. The narrative explores, moves through, and finally endows 
these places with confirmatory positive and/or negative. values. 
This moral commensuration in the interplay between narrative and do­
mestic space is extendable, indeed reproducible, in the world beyond metro­
politan centers like Paris or London. In turn such French or English places 
have a kind of export value: whatever is good or bad about places at home 
is shipped out and assigned comparable virtue or vice abroad. When in his 
inaugural lecture in 187o as Slade Professor at Oxford, Ruskin speaks of 
England's pure race, he can then go on to tell his audience to turn England 
into a "country again [that is J a royal throne of kings; a sceptred isle, for all 
the world a source of light, a centre of peace." The allusion to Shakespeare 
is meant to re-establish and relocate a preferential feeling for England. This 
time, however, Ruskin conceives of England as functioning fonnally on a 
world scale; the feelings of approbation for the island kingdom that Shake­
speare had imagined principally but not exclusively confined at home are 
rather startlingly mobilized for imperial, indeed aggressively colonial ser­
vice. Become colonists, found "colonies as fast and as far as [you are) able;" 
he seems to be saying. 28 
My third point is that such domestic cultural enterprises as narrative 
fiction and history (once again I emphasize the narrative component) are 
premised on the recording, ordering, observing powers of the central autho­
rizing subject, or ego. To say of this subject, in a quasi-tautological manner, 
that it writes because it can write is to refer not only to domestic society but So . CONSOLIDATED VISION 
to the outlying world. The capacity to represent, portray, characterize, and 
depict is not easily available to just any member of just any society; more­
over, the "what" and "how" in the representation of"things," while allowing 
for considerable individual freedom, are circumscribed and socially regu­
·lated. We have become very aware in recent years of the constraints upon 
the cultural representation of women, and the pressures that go into the 
created representations of inferior classes and races. In all these areas-­
gender, class, and race--criticism has correctly focussed upon the institu­
tional forces in modern Western societies that shape and set limits on the 
representation of what are considered essentially subordinate beings; thus 
representation itself has been characterized as keeping the subordinate sub­
ordinate, the inferior inferior. 
( II ) 
Jane Austen and Empire 
We are on solid ground with V. G. Kiernan when he says that "em­
pires must have a mould of ideas or conditioned reflexes to flow 
into, and youthful nations dream of a great place in the world as young men 
dream of fame and forrones." 29 It is, as I have been saying throughout, too 
simple and reductive to argue that everything in European or American 
culture therefore prepares for or consolidates the grand idea of empire. It is 
also, however, historically inaccurate to ignore those tendencies--whether 
in narrative, political theory, or pictorial technique--that enabled, encour­
aged, and otherwise assured the West's readiness to assume and enjoy the 
experience of empire. If there was cultural resistance to the notion of im 
imperial mission, there was not much support for that resistance in the main 
departments of cultural thought. Liberal though he was, John Stuart Mill­
as a telling case in poin~could still say, "The sacred duties which civilized 
nations owe to the independence and nationality of each other, are not 
binding towards those to whom nationality and independence are certain 
evil, or at best a questionable good." Ideas like this were not original with 
Mill; they were already current in the English subjugation oflreland during 
the sixteenth century and, as Nicholas Canny has persuasively demon­
strated, were equally useful in the ideology of English colonization in the 
Americas. 30 Almost all colonial schemes begin with an assumption of native 
backwardness and general inadequacy to be independent, "equal," and fit. Jane Austen and Empire 81 
Why that should be so, why sacred obligation on one front should not be 
binding on another, why rights accepted in one may be denied in another, 
are questions best understood in the terms of a culture well-grounded in 
moral, economic, and even metaphysical norms designed to approve a 
satisfying local, that is European, order and to permit the abrogation of the 
right to a similar order abroad. Such a statement may appear preposterous 
.or extreme. In fact, it formulates the connection between Europe's well­
being and cultural identity on the one hand and, on the other, the subjuga­
tion of imperial realms overseas rather too fastidiously and circumspectly. 
Part of our difficulty today in accepting any connection at all is that ·we tend 
to reduce this complicated matter to an apparently simple causal one, whjch 
in turn produces a rhetoric of blame and defensiveness. I am not saying that 
the major factor in early European culture was that it caused late-nineteenth­
century imperialism, and 1 am not implying that all the problems of the 
formerly colonial world should be blamed on Europe. I am saying, however, 
that European culture often, ~f not always, characterized itself in such a way 
as simultaneously to validate its own preferences while also advocating those 
preferences in conjunction with distant imperial rule. Mill certainly did: he 
always recommended that India not be given independence. When for vari­
ous reasons imperial rule concerned Europe more intensely after 188o, this 
schizophrenic habit became useful. 
The first thing to be done now is more or less to jettison simple causality 
in thinking through the relationship between Europe and the non-European 
world, and lessening the hold on our thought of the equally simple temporal 
sequence. We must not admit any notion, for instance, that proposes to show 
that Wordsworth, Austen, or Coleridge, because they wrote before 18.57, 
actually caused the establishment of formal British governmental rule over 
India after 185]. We should try to discern instead a counterpoint between 
overt patterns in British writing about Britain and representations of the 
world beyond the British Isles. The inherent mode for this counterpoint is 
not tempor!ll but spatial. How do writers in the period before the great age 
of explicit, programmatic colonial expansion-the "scramble for Africa," 
say-situate and see themselves and their work in the larger ~orld? We shall 
find them using striking but careful strategies, many of them derived from 
expected sources-positive ideas of home, of a nation and its language, of 
proper order, good behavior, moral values. 
But positiye ideas of this sort do more than validate "our" world. They 
also tend to devalue other worlds and, perhaps more significantly from a 
retrospective point of view, they do not prevent or inhibit or give resistance 
to horrendously unattractive imperialist practices. No, cultural forms like 
the novel or the opera do not cause people to go out and imperialize-CONSOLIDATED VISION 
Carlyle did not drive Rhodes directly, and he certainly cannot. be "blamed" 
for the problems in today's southern Africa-but it is genuinely troubling to 
see how little Britain's great humanistic ideas, institutions, and monu.ments, 
which we still celebrate as havingthe power ahistorically to command our 
approval, how little they stand in the way of the accelerating imperial 
process. We are entitled to ask how this body of humanistic ideas co-existed 
so comfortably with imperialism, and why-until the resistance to imperial­
ism in the imperial domain, among Africans, Asians, Latin Americans, devel­
oped-there was little significant opposition or deterrence to empire at 
home. Perhaps the custom of distinguishing "our" home and order from 
"theirs" grew into a harsh political rule for accumulating more of"them" to 
rule, study, and subordinate. In the great, humane ideas and values promul­
gated by mainstream European culture, we have precisely that "mould of 
ideas or conditioned reflexes" of which Kiernan speaks, into which the 
whole business of empire later flowed. 
The extent to which these ideas are actually invested in geographical 
distinctions between real places is the subject of Raymond Williams's richest 
book, The Country and the City. His argument concerning the interplay be­
tween rural and urban places in England admits of the most extraordinary 
transformations-from the pastoral populism of Langland, through Ben 
Jonson's country-house poems and the novels of Dickens's London, right up 
to visions of the metropolis in twentieth-century literature. Mainly, of 
course, the book is about how English culture has dealt with land, its 
possession, imagination, and organization. And while he does address the 
export of England to the colonies, Williams does so, as I suggested earlier, 
in a less focussed way and less expansively than the practice actually war­
rants. Near the end of The Country and the City he volunteers that "from at 
least the mid-nineteenth century, and with important instances earlier, 
there was this larger context [the relationship between England and the 
colonies, whose effects on the English imagination "have gone deeper than 
can easily be traced"] within which every idea and every iJ1lage was con­
sciously and unconsciously affected." He goes on quickly to cite "the idea 
of emigration to the colonies" as one such image prevailing in various novels 
by Dickens, the Brontes, Gaskell, and rightly shows that "new rural socie­
ties," all of them colonial, enter the imaginative metropolitan economy of 
English literature via Kipling, early Orwell, Maugham. After 188o there 
comes a "dramatic extension of landscape and social relations": this corre­
sponds more or less exactly with the great age of empire. 31 
It is dangerous to disagree with Williams, yet I would venture to say that 
if one began to look for something like an imperial map of the world in 
English literature, it would turn up with amazing insistence and frequency Jane Austen and Empire 
well before the mid-nineteenth century. And turn up not only with the inert 
regularity suggesting something taken for granted, but-more interest­
ingly-threaded through, forming a vital part of the texture of linguistic and 
cultural practice. There were established English offshore interests in Ire­
land, America, the Caribbean, and Asia from the sixteenth century on, and 
even a quick inventory reveals poets, philosophers, historians, dramatists, 
statesmen, novelists, travel writers, chroniclers, soldiers, and fabulists who 
prized, cared for, and traced these interests with continuing concern. (Much 
of this is well discussed by Peter Hulme in Colonial E'ncounters.)n Similar 
points may be made for France, Spain, and Ponuga~ not only as overseas 
powers in their own right, but as competitors with the British. How can we 
examine these interests at work in modern England before the age of empire, 
i.e., during the period between 18oo and 187o? 
We would do well to follow Williams's lead, and look first at that period 
of crisis following upon England's wide-scale land enclosure at the end of 
the eighteenth century. The old organic rural communities were dissolved 
and new ones forged under the impulse of parliamentary activity, industrial­
ization, and demographic dislocation, but there also occurred a new process 
of relocating England (and in France, France) within a much larger circle of 
the world map. During the first half of the eighteenth century, Anglo-French 
competition in North America and India was intense; in the second half 
there were numerous violent encounters between England and France in the 
Americas, the Caribbean, and the Levant, and of course in Europe itself. The 
major pr~-Romantic literature in France and England contains a constant 
stream of references to the overseas dominions: one thinks not only of 
various Encyclopedists, the Abbe Raynal, de Brosses, and Volney, but also 
of Edmund Burke, Beckford, Gibbon, Johnson, and William Jones. 
In 1902 J. A. Hobson described imperialism as the expansion of nationality, 
implying that the process was understandable mainly by considering expan­
sion as the more important of the two terms, since "nationality" was a fully 
formed, fixed quantity/ 3 whereas a century before it was still in the process 
of heingformed, at home and abroad as well. In Physics and Politics (1887) Walter 
Bagehot speaks with extraordinary relevance of "nation-making." Between 
France and Britain in the late eighteenth century there were two contests: 
the battle for strategic gains abroad-in India, the Nile delta, the Western 
Hemisphere--and the battle for a triumphant nationality. Both battles con­
trast "Englis}mess" with "the French," and no matter how intimate and 
closeted the supposed English or French "essence" appears to be, it was 
almost always thought of as being (as opposed to already) made, and being 
fought out with the other great competitor. Thackeray's Becky Sharp, for 
example, is as much an upstart as she is because of her half-French heritage. CONSOLIDATED VISION 
Earlier in the century, the upright abolitionist posture of Wilberforce and his 
allies developed partly out of a desire to make life harder for French 
hegemony in the Antilles. 34 
These considerations suddenly provide a fascinatingly expanded dimen­
sion to Mansfield Park (1814), the most explicit in its ideological and moral 
affirmations of Austen's novels. Williams once again is in general dead right: 
Austen's novels express an "attainable quality· of life," in money and prop­
erty acquired, moral discriminations made, the right choices put in place, the 
correct "improvements" implemented, the finely nuanced language affirmed 
and classified. Yet, Williams continues, 
What [Cobbett] names, riding past on the road, are classes. Jane Austen, 
from inside the houses, can never see that, for all the intricacy of her 
social description. All her discrimination is, understandably, internal 
and exclusive. She is concerned with the conduct of people who, in the 
complications of improvement, are repeatedly trying to make them­
selves into a class. But where only one class is seen, no classes are 
seen.Js 
As a general description of how Austen manages to elevate certain "moral 
discriminations" into "an independent value," this is excellent. Where Manl­
fteld Park is concerned, however, a good deal more needs to be said, giving 
greater explicitness and width to Williams's survey. Perhaps then Austen, 
and indeed, pre-imperialist novels generally, will appear to be more impli­
cated in the rationale for imperialist expansion than at first sight they have 
been. 
After Lukacs and Proust, we have become so accustomed to thinking of 
the novel's plot and structure as constituted mainly by temporality that we 
have overlooked the function of space, geography, and location. For it is not 
only the very young Stephen Dedalus, but every other young protagonist 
before him as well, who sees himself in a widening spiral at home, in Ireland, 
in the world. Like many other novels, Mansfield Park is very precisely about 
a series of both small and large dislocations and relocations in space that 
.occur before, at the end of the novel, Fanny Price, the niece, becomes the 
spiritual mistress of Mansfield Park. And that place itself is located by 
Austen at the center of an arc of interests and concerns spanning the 
hemisphere, two major seas, and four continents. 
As in Austen's other novels, the central group that finally emerges with 
marriage and property "ordained" is not based exclusively upon blood. Her 
novel enacts the disaffiliation (in the literal sense) of some members of a 
family, and the affiliation between others and one or two chosen and tested Jane Aurten and Empire 
outsiders: in other words, blood relationships are not enough to assure 
continuity, hierarchy, authority, both domestic and international. Thus 
Fanny Price--the poor niece, the orphaned child from the outlying city of 
Portsmouth, the neglected, demure, and upright wallflower--gradually ac­
quires a status commensurate with, even superior to, that of most of her 
more fortunate relatives. In this pattern of affiliation and in her assumption 
of authority, Fanny Price is relatively passive. She resists the misdemeanors 
and the importunings of others, and very occasionally she ventures actions 
on her own: all in all, though, one has the impression that Austen has designs 
for her that Fanny herself can scarcely comprehend, just as throughout the 
novel Fanny is thought of by everyone as "comfort" and "acquisition" 
despite herself. Like Kipling's Kim O'Hara, Fanny is both device and instru­
ment in a la~ger pattern, as well as a fully fledged novelistic character. 
Fanny, like Kim, requires direction, requires the patronage and outside 
authority that her own impoverished experience cannot provide. Her con­
scious connections are to some people and to some places, but the novel 
reveals other connections of which she has faint glimmerings that neverthe­
less demand her presence and service. She comes into a situation that opens 
with an intricate set of moves which, taken together, demand sorting out, 
adjustment, and rearrangement. Sir Thomas Bertram has been captivated by 
one Ward sister, the others have not done well, and "an absolute breach" 
opens up; their "circles were so distinct," the distances between them so 
great that they have been out of touch for eleven years; 36 fallen on hard 
rimes, the Prices seek out the Bertrams. Gradually, and even though she is 
not the eldest, Fanny becomes the focus of attention as she is sent to 
Mansfield Park, there to begin her new life. Similarly, the Bertrams have 
given up London (the result of Lady Bertram's "little ill health and a great 
deal of indolence") and come to reside entirely in the country. 
What sustains this life materially is the Bertram estate in Antigua, which 
is not doing well. Austen takes pains to show us two apparently disparate but 
actually_ convergent processes: the growth of Fanny's importance to the 
Bertrams' economy, including Antigua, and Fanny's own steadfastness in the 
face of numerous challenges, threats, and surprises. In both, Austen's imagi­
nation works with a steel-like rigor through a mode that we might call 
geographical and spatial clarification. Fanny's ignorance whe.n she arrives at 
Mansfield as a frightened ten-year-old is signified by her inability to "put the 
map of Europ.e together," 37 and for much of the first half of the novel the 
action is concerned with a whole range of issues whose common denomina­
tor, misused or misunderstood, is space: not only is Sir Thomas in Antigua 
to make things better there and at home, but at Mansfield Park, Fanny, 
Edmund, and her aunt Norris negotiate where she is to live, read, and work, 86 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
where fires are to be lit; the friends and cousins concern themselves with the 
improvement of estates, and the importance of chapels (i.e., religious author­
ity) to domesticity is envisioned and debated. When, as a device for stirring 
things up, the Crawfords suggest a play (the tinge ()f France that hangs a 
little suspiciously over their background is significant), Fanny's discomfiture 
is polarizingly acute. She cannot participate, cannot easily accept that rooms 
for living are turned into theatrical space, although, with all its confusion of 
roles and purposes, the play, Kotzebue's Lover.r' V07JJ.r, is prepared for anyway. 
We are to surmise, I think, that while Sir Thomas is away tending his 
colonial garden, a number of inevitable mismeasurements (explicitly as­
sociated with feminine "lawlessness") will occur. These are apparent not 
only in innocent strolls by the three pairs of young friends through a park, 
in which people lose and catch sight of one another unexpectedly, but most 
clearly in the various flirtations and engagements between the young men 
and women left without true parental authority, Lady Bertram being indif­
ferent, Mrs. Norris unsuitable. There is sparring, innuendo, perilous taking 
on of roles: all of this of course crystallizes in preparations for the play, in 
which something dangerously close to libertinage is about to be (but never 
is) enacted. Fanny, whose earlier sense of alienation, distance, and fear 
derives from her first uprooting, now becomes a sort of surrogate conscience 
about what is right and how far is too much. Yet she has no power to 
implement her uneasy awareness, and until Sir Thomas suddenly returns 
from "abroad," the rudderless drift continues. 
When he does appear, preparations for the play are immediately stopped, 
and in a passage remarkable for its executive dispatch, Austen narrates the 
re-establishment of Sir Thomas's local rule: 
It was a busy morning with him. Conversation with any of them 
occupied but a small part of it. He had to reinstate himself in all the 
wonted concerns of his Mansfield life, to see his steward and his 
bailiff-to examine and compute-and, in the intervals of business, to 
walk into his stables and his gardens, and nearest plantations; but active 
and methodical, he had not only done all this before he resumed his 
seat as master of the house at dinner, he had also set the carpenter to 
work in pulling down what had been so lately put up in the billiard 
room, and given the scene painter his dismissal, long enough to justify 
the pleasing belief of his being then at least as far off as Northampton. 
The scene painter was gone, having spoilt only the floor of one room, 
ruined all the coachman's sponges, and made five of the under-servants 
idle and dissatisfied; and Sir Thomas was in hopes that another day or 
tWo would suffice to wipe away every outward memento of what had Jane Austen and Empire 
been, even to the destruction of every unbound copy of 'Lovers' Vows' 
in the house, for he was burning all that met his eye.38 
The force of this paragraph is unmistakable. Not only is this a Crusoe 
setting things in order: it is also an early Protestant eliminating all traces of 
frivolous behavior. There is nothing in Mansfield Park that would contradict 
u~, however, were we to assume that Sir Thomas does exactly the same 
things--on a larger scale--in his Antigua "plantations." Whatever was 
wrong there--and the internal evidence garnered by Warren Roberts sug­
gests that economic depression, slavery, and competition with France were 
at issue~9-Sir Thomas was able to fix, thereby maintaining his control over 
his colonial domain. More clearly than anywhere else in her fiction, Austen 
here synchronizes domestic with international authority, making it plain­
that the values associated with such higher things as ordination, law, and 
propriety must be grounded firmly in actual rule over and possession of 
territory. She sees clearly that to hold and rule Mansfield Park ino hold and 
rule an imperial estate in close, not to say inevitable association with it. 
What assures the domestic tranquility and attractive harmony of one is the 
productivity and regulated discipline of the other. 
Before both can be fully secured, however, Fanny must become more 
actively involved in the unfolding action. From frightened and often victim­
ized poor relation she is gradually transformed into a directly participating 
member of the Bertram household at Mansfield Park. For this, I believe, 
Austen designed the second part of the book, which contains not only the 
failure of the Edmund-Mary Crawford romance as well as the disgraceful 
profligacy ofL.ydia and Henry Crawford, but Fanny Price's rediscovery and 
rejection of her Portsmouth home, the injury and incapacitation of Tom 
Bertram (the eldest son), and the launching of William Price's naval career. 
This entire ensemble of relationships and events is finally capped with 
Edmund's marriage to Fanny, whose place in Lady Bertram's household is 
taken by Susan Price, her sister. It is no exaggeration to interpret the 
concluding sections of Manrjield Park as the coronation of an arguably 
unnatural (or at very least, illogical) principle at the heart of a desired 
English order. The aud;tcity of Austen's vision is disguised a little by her 
voice, which despite its occasional archness is understated and notably 
modest. But we should not misconstrue the limited references to the outside 
world, her ligh~ly stressed allusions to work, process, and class, her apparent 
ability to abstract (in Raymond Williams's phrase) "an everyday uncompro­
mising morality which is in the end separable from its social basis." In fact 
Austen is far less diffident, far more severe. 
The clues are to be found in Fanny, or rather in how rigorously we are 88 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
able to consider her. True, her visit to her original Portsmouth home, where 
her immediate family still resides, upsets the aesthetic and emotional bal­
ance she has become ac<..""Ustomed to at Mansfield Park, and true she has 
begun to take its wonderful luxuries for granted, even as being essential. 
These are fairly routine and natural consequences of getting used to a new 
plac~. But Austen is talking about two other matters we must not mistake. 
One is Fanny's newly enlarged sense of what it means to be at home; when 
she takes stock of things after she gets to Ponsmouth, this is not merely a 
matter of expanded space. 
Fanny was almost stunned. The smallness of the house, and thinness of 
the walls, brought every thing so close to her, that, added to the fatigue 
of her journey, and all her recent agitation, she hardly knew how to 
bear it. Within the room all was tranquil enough, for Susan having 
disappeared with the others, there were soon only her father and herself 
remaining; and he taking out a newspaper-the accustomary loan of a 
neighbour, applied himself to studying it, without seeming to recollect 
her existence. The solitary candle was held between himself and the 
paper, without any reference to her possible convenien·ce; but she had 
nothing to do, and was glad to have the light screened from her aching 
head, as she sat in bewildered, broken, sorrowful contemplation. 
She was at home. But alas! it was not such a home, she had not such 
a welcome, as--she checked herself; she was unreasonable .... A day 
or two might shew the difference. She only was to blame. Yet she 
thought it would not have been so at Mansfield. No, in her uncle's 
house there would have been a consideration of times and seasons, a 
regulation of subject, a propriety, an attention towards every body 
:which there was not here.40 
In too small a space, you cannot see clearly, you cannot think clearly, you 
cannot have regulation or attention of the proper son. The fineness of 
Austen's detail ("the solitary candle was held between himself and the paper, 
without any reference to her possible convenience") renders very precisely 
the dangers of unsociability, of lonely insularity, of diminished awareness 
that are rectified in larger and better administered spaces. 
That such spaces are not available to Fanny by direct inheritance, legal 
title, by propinquity, contiguity, or adjacence (Mansfield Park and Ports­
mouth are separated by many hours' journey) is precisely Austen's point. To 
earn the right to Mansfield Park you must first leave home as a kind of 
·indentured servant or, to put the case in extreme terms, as a kind of 
transponed commodity-this, clearly, is the fate of Fanny and her brother Jane Austen and Empire 
William--but then you have the promise of future wealth. I think Austen 
sees what Fanny does as a domestic or small-scale movement in space that 
corresponds to the larger, more openly colonial movements of Sir Thomas, 
her mentor, the man whose estate she inherits. The two movements depend 
on each other. 
The second more complex matter about which Austen speaks, albeit 
indirectly, raises an interesting theoretical issue. Austen's awareness of em­
pire is obviously very different, alluded to very much more casually, than 
Conrad's or Kipling's. In her time the British were extremely active in the 
Caribbean and in South America, notably Brazil and Argentina. Austen 
seems only vaguely aware of the details of these activities, although the 
sense· that extensive West Indian plantations were important was fairly 
widespread in metropolitan England. Antigua and Sir Thomas's trip there 
have a definitive function in Mansfield Park, which, I have been saying, is 
both incidental, referred to only in passing, and absolutely crucial to the 
action. How are we to assess Austen's few references to Antigua, and what 
are we to make of them interpretatively? 
My contention is that by that very odd combination of casualness and 
stress, Austen reveals herself to be assuming (just as Fanny assumes, in both 
senses of the word) the importance of an empire to the situation at home. 
Let me go further. Since Austen refers to and uses Antigua as she does in 
Manifield Park, there needs to be a commensurate effort on the part of her 
readers to understand concretely the historical valences in the reference; to 
put it differently, we should try to understand what she referred to, why she 
gave it the importance she did, and why indeed she made the choice, for she 
might have done something different to establish Sir Thomas's wealth. Let 
us now calibrate the signifying power of the references to Antigua in Mans­
field Park; how do they occupy the place they do, what are they doing there? 
According to Austen we are to conclude that no matter how isolated and 
insulated the English place (e.g., Mansfield Park), it requires overseas suste­
nance. Sir Thomas's property in the Caribbean would have had to be a sugar 
plantation maintained by slave labor (not abolished until the 183os): these are 
not dead historical facts but, as Austen certainly knew, evident historical 
realities. Before the Anglo-French competition the major distinguishing 
characteristic of Western empires (Roman, Spanish, and Portuguese) was 
that the earlier empires were bent on loot, as Conrad puts it, on the transport 
of treasure from the colonies to Europe, with very little attention to devel­
opment, organization, or system within the colonies themselves; Britain and, 
to a lesser degree, France both wanted to make their empires long-term, 
profitable, ongoing concerns, and they competed in this enterprise, nowhere 
more so than in the colonies of the Caribbean, where the transport of slaves, CONSOLIDATED VISION 
the functioning of large sugar plantations, and the development of sugar 
markets, which raised the issues of protectionism, monopolies, and price­
all these were more or less constantly, competitively at issue. 
Far from being nothing much "out there," British colonial possessions in 
the Antilles and Leeward Islands were during Jane Austen's time a crucial 
setting for Anglo-French colonial competition. Revolutionary ideas from 
France were being exported there, and there was a steady decline in British 
profits: the French sugar plantations were producing more sugar at less cost. 
However, slave rebellions in and out of Haiti were incapacitating France 
and spurring British interests to intervene more directly and to gain greater 
local power. Still, compared with its earlier prominence for the home mar­
ket, British Caribbean sugar production in the nineteenth century had to 
compete with alternative sugar-cane supplies in Brazil and Mauritius, the 
emergence of a European beet-sugar industry, and the gradual dominance 
of free-trade ideology and practice. 
In Mansfield Park--both in its formal characteristics and in its contents-a 
number of these currents converge. The most important is the avowedly 
· complete subordination of colony to metropolis. Sir Thomas, absent from 
Mansfield Park, is never seen as prerent in Antigua, which elicits at most a 
half dozen references in the novel. There is a passage, a part of which I 
quoted earlier, from John Stuart. Mill's Principler of Political Economy that 
catches the spirit of Austen's use of Antigua. I quote it here in full: 
These [outlying possessions of ours] are hardly to be looked upon as 
countries, carrying on an exchange of commodities with other coun­
tries, but more properly as outlying agricultural or manufacturing 
estates belonging to a larger community. Our West Indian colonies, for 
example, cannot be regarded as countries with a productive capital of 
their own ... [but are rather] the place where England finds it conve­
nient to carry on the production of sugar, coffee and a few other 
tropical commodities. All the capital employed is English capital; al­
most all the industry is carried on for English uses; there is little 
production of anything except for staple commodities, and these are 
sent to England, not to be exchanged for things exported to the colony 
and consumed by its inhabitants, but to be sold in England for the 
benefit of the proprietors there. The trade with the West Indies is 
hardly to be considered an external trade, but more resembles the 
· traffic between town and country. 41 
To some extent Antigua is like London or Portsmouth, a less desirable 
setting than a country estate like Mansfield Park, but producing goods to be Jane Austen and Empire 91 
consumed· by everyone (by the early nineteenth century every Britisher 
used sugar), although owned and maintained by a small group of aristocrats 
and gentry. The Bertrams and the other characters in Manifield Parle are a 
subgroup within the minority, and for them the island is wealth, which 
Austen regards as being converted to propriety, order, and, at the end of the 
novel, comfort, an added good. But why "added"? Because, Austen tells us 
pointedly in the final chapters, she wants to."restore every body, not greatly 
in fault themselves, to tolerable comfort, and to have done with all the 
rest."42-
This can be interpreted to mean first that the novel has done enough in 
the way of destabilizing the lives of "every body" and must now set them 
at rest: actually Austen says this explicitly, in a bit of meta-fictional impa­
tience, the novelist commenting on her own work as having gone on long 
enough and now needing to be brought to a dose. Second, it can mean that 
"every body" may now be finally permitted to realize what it means to be 
properly at home, and at rest, without the need to wander about or to come 
and go. (This does not include young William, who, we assume, will con­
tinue to roam the seas .in the British navy on whatever commercial and 
political missions may still be required. Such matters draw from Austen only 
a last brief gesture, a passing remark about William's "continuing good 
conduct and rising fame.") As for those finally resident in Mansfield Park 
itself, more in the way of domesticated advantages is given to these now fully 
acclimatized souls, and to none more than to Sir Thomas. He understands 
for the first time what has been missing in his education of his children, and 
he understands it in the terms paradoxically provided for him by unnamed 
outside forces, so to speak, the wealth of Antigua and the imported example 
of Fanny Price. Note here how the curious alternation of outside and inside 
follows the pattern identified by Mill of the outside becoming the inside by 
use and, to use Austen's word, "disposition": 
Here [in his deficiency of training, of allowing Mrs. Norris too great a 
role, of letting his children dissemble and repress feeling} had been 
grievous mismanagement; but, bad as it was, he gradually grew to feel 
that it had not been the most direful mistake in his plan of education. 
Some thing must have been wanting within, or time would have worn 
away much of its ill effect. He feared that principle, active principle, 
had been wanting, that they had never been properly taught to govern 
their inclinations an,~ tempers, by that sense of duty which can alone 
suffice. They had been instructed theoretically in their religion, but 
never required to bring it into daily practice. To be distinguished for 
elegance and accomplishment~the authorized object of their youth-CONSOLIDATED VISION 
could have had no useful influence that way, no moral effect on the 
mind. He had meant them to be good, but his cares had been directed 
to the understanding and manners, not the disposition; and of the 
necessity of self-denial and humility, he feared they had never heard· 
from any lips that could profit them.43 
What was wanting within was in fact supplied by the wealth derived from 
a West Indian plantation and a poor provincial relative, both brought in to 
Mansfield Park and set to work. Yet on their own, neither the one il.Or the 
other could have sufficed; they require each other and then, more important, 
they need executive disposition, which in turn helps to reform the rest of the 
Bertram circle. All this Austen leaves to her reader to supply in the way of 
literal explication. 
And that is what reading her entails. But all these things having to do with 
the outside brought in seem unmistakably there in the suggestiveness of her 
allusive and abstract language. A principle "wanting within" is, I believe, 
intended to evoke for us memories of Sir Thomas's absences in Antigua, or 
the sentimental and near-whimsical vagary on the part of the three variously 
deficient Ward sisters by which a niece is displaced from one household to 
another. Bur that the Bertrams did become better if not altogether good, that 
some sense of duty was imparted to them, that they learned to govern their 
inclinations and tempers and brought religion into daily practice, that they 
"directed disposition": all of this did occur because outside (or rather outly­
ing) factors were lodged properly inward, became native to Mansfield Park, 
with Fanny the niece its final spiritual mistress, and Edmund the second son 
its spiritual master. 
An additional benefit is that Mrs. Norris is dislodged; this is described as 
"the great supplementary comfort of Sir Thomas's life."44 Once the princi­
ples have been interiorized, the comforts follow: Fanny is settled for the time 
beip.g at Thornton Lacey "with every attention to her comfort"; her home 
later becomes "the home of affection and comfort"; Susan is brought in "first 
as a comfort to Fanny, then as an auxiliary, and at last as her substitute" 4' 
when the new import takes Fanny's place by Lady Bertram's side. The 
pattern established at the outset of the novel clearly continues, only now it 
has what Austen intended to give it all along, an internalized and retrospec­
tively guaranteed rationale. This is the rationale that Raymond Williams 
describes as "an everyday, uncompromising morality which is in the end 
separable from its social basis and which, in other hands, can be turned 
against it." 
I have tried to show that the morality in fact is not separable from its social· 
basis: right up to the last sentence, Austen affirms and repeats the geographi-Jane Austen and Empire 93 
cal process of expansion involving trade, production, and consumption that 
predates, underlies, and guarantees the morality. And expansion, as Gal­
lagher reminds us, whether "through colonial rule was liked or disliked, [its] 
desirability through one mode or another was generally accepted. So in the 
event there were few domestic constraints upon expansion." 46 Most critics 
have tended to forget or overlook that process, which has seemed less 
important to critics than Austen herself s~emed to think. But interpreting 
Jane Austen depends on who does the interpreting, when it is done, and no 
less important, from where it is done. If with feminists, with great cultural 
critics sensitive to history and class like Williams, with cultural and stylistic 
interpreters, we have been sensitized to the issues their interests raise, we 
should now proceed to regard the geographical division of the world-after 
all significant to Mansftelti Park--as not neutral (any more than class and 
gender are neutral) but as politically charged, beseeching the attention and 
elucidation its considerable proportions require. The question is thus not 
only how to understand and with what to connect Austen's morality and its 
social basis, but also what to read of it. 
Take once again the casual references to Antigua, the ease with which Sir 
Thomas's needs in England are met by a Caribbean sojourn, the uninflected, 
unreflective citations of Antigua (or the Mediterranean, or India, which is 
where Lady Bertram, in a fit of distracted impatience, requires that William 
should go " 'that I may have a shawl. I think I will have two shawls.' ")47 
They stand for a significance "out there" that frames the genuinely impor­
tant action here, but not for a great significance. Yet these signs of "abroad" 
include, even as they repress, a rich and complex history, which has since 
achieved a status that the Bertrams, the Prices, and Austen herself would not, 
could not recognize. To call this "the Third World" begins to deal with the 
realities but by no means exhausts the political or cultural history. 
We must first take stock of Mantjield Parle's prefigurations of a later 
English history as registered in fiction. The Bertrams' usable colony in 
Mantjielti Park can be read as pointing forward to Charles Gould's San Tome 
mine in Norrromo, or to the Wilcoxes' Imperial and West African Rubber 
Company in Forster's Howardt End, or to any of these distant but CQnvenient 
treasure spots in Great Expectation;, Jean Rhys's Wide Sargarro Sea, Heart of 
Dar*nes.r---resources to be visited, talked about, described, or appreciated for 
domestic reasons, for local metropolitan benefit. If we think ahead to these 
other novels, Sir Thomas's Antigua readily acquires a slightly greater den­
sity than the discrete, reticent appearances it makes in the pages of Mantjielti 
Park. And already our reading of the novel begins to open up at those points 
where ironically Austen was most economical and her critics most (dare one 
say it?) negligent. Her "Antigua" is therefore not just a slight but a definite 94 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
way of marking the outer limits of what Williams calls domestic improve­
ments, or a quick allusion to the mercantile venturesomeness of acquiring 
overseas dominions as a source for local furrunes, or one reference among 
many attesting to a historical sensibility suffused not just with manners and 
courtesies but with contests of ideas, struggles with Napoleonic France, 
awareness of seismic economic and social change during a revolutionary 
period in world history. 
Second, we must see "Antigua" held in a precise place in Austen's moral 
geography, and in her prose, by historical changes that her novel rides like 
a vessel on a mighty sea. The Bertrams could not have been possible without 
the slave trade, sugar, and the colonial planter class; as a social type Sir 
Thomas would have been familiar to eighteenth- and early-nineteenth­
century readers who knew the powerful influence of the class through 
politics, plays (like Cumberland's The We.rt Indian), and many other public 
activities (large houses, famous parties and social ritual~, well-known com­
mercial enterprises, celebrated marriages). As the old system of protected 
monopoly gradually disappeared and as a new class of settler-planters dis­
placed the old absentee system, the West Indian interest lost dominance: 
cotton manufacture, an even niore open system of trade, and abolition of the 
slave trade reduced the power and prestige of people like the Bertrams, 
whose frequency of sojourn in the Caribbean then decreased. 
Thus Sir Thomas's infrequent trips to Antigua as an absentee plantation 
owner reflect the diminishment in his class's power, a reduction directly 
expressed in the title of Lowell Ragatz's classic The Fall of the Planter Class 
in the British Caribbean, IJif.JI83J (19z8). But is what is hidden or allusive in 
Austen made sufficiently explicit more than one hundred years later in 
Ragatz? Does the aesthetic silence or discretion of a great novel in 1814 
receive adequate explication in a major work of historical research a full 
century later? Can we assume that the process of interpretation is fulfilled, 
or will it continue as new material comes to light? 
For all his learning Ragatz still finds it in himself to speak of "the Negro 
race" as having the following characteristics: "he stole, he lied, he was 
simple, suspicious, inefficient, irresponsible, lazy, superstitious, and loose in 
his sexual relations." 48 Such "history" as this therefore happily gave way to 
the revisionary work of Caribbean historians like Eric Williams and C.L.R. 
James, and more recently Robin Blackburn, in The Overthrow of Colonial 
Slavery, 1776-I848; in these works slavery and empire are shown to have 
fostered the rise and consolidation of capitalism well beyond the old planta­
tion monopolies, as well as to have been a powerful ideological sy11'tem 
whose original connection to specific economic interests may have gone, but 
whose effects continued for decades. Jane Austen and Empire 
The political and moral ideas of the age are to be examined in the very 
closest relation to the economic development .... 
An outworn interest, whose bankruptcy smells to heaven in historical 
perspective, can exercise an obstructionist and disruptive effect which 
can only be explained by the powerful services it had previously 
rendered and the entrenchment previously gained ... 
The ideas built on these interests continue long after the interests have 
been destroyed and work their old mis~hief, which is all the more 
mischievous because the interests to which they corresponded no lon­
ger exist. 49 95 
Thus Etic Williams in Capitalirm and Slavery (1961). The question of interpre­
tation, indeed of writing itself, is tied to the question of interests, which we 
have seen are at work in aesthetic as well as historical writing, then and now. 
We must not say that since Man.rfteld Park is a novel, its affiliations with a 
sordid history are irrelevant or transcended, not only because it is irrespon­
sible to do so, but because we know too much to say so in good faith. Having 
read Man.rfteld Park as pan of the structure of an expanding imperialist 
venture, one cannot simply restore it to the canon of "great literary master­
pieces"-to which it most certainly belongs--and leave it at that. Rather, I 
think, the novel steadily, if unobtrusively, opens up a broad expanse of 
domestic imperialist culture without which Britain's subsequent acquisition 
of territory would not have been possible. 
I have spent rime on Manrfield Park to illustrate a type of analysis infre­
quently encountered in mainstream interpretations, or for that matter in 
readings rigorously based in one or another of the advanced theoretical 
schools. Yet only in the global perspective implied by Jane Austen and her 
characters can the novel's quite astonishing general position be made clear. 
I think of such a reading as completing or complementing others, not 
discounting or displacing them. And it bears stressing that because Manrfield 
Park connects the actualities of British power overseas to the domestic 
.imbroglio within the Benram estate, there is no way of doing such readings 
as mine, no way of understanding the "structure of attitude and reference" 
except by working through the novel. Without reading it in full, we would 
fail to understand the strength of that structure and the way it was activated 
and maintained in literature. But in reading it carefully, we can sense how 
ideas about dependent races and territories were held both by foreign-office 
executives, colonial bureaucrats, and military strategists and by intelligent 
novel-readers educating themselves in the fine points of moral evaluation, 
literary balance, and stylistic finish. 
There is a paradox .here in reading Jane Austen which I have been CONSOLIDATED VISION 
impressed by but can in no way resolve. All the evidence says that even the 
most routine aspects of holding slaves on a West Indian sugar plantation 
were cruel stuff. And everything we know about Austen and her values is at 
odds with the cruelty of slavery. Fanny Price reminds her cousin that after 
asking Sir Thomas about the slave trade, "There was such a dead silence" 50 
as to suggest that one world could not be connected with the other since 
there simply is no common language for both. That is true. But what 
stimulates the extraordinary discrepancy into life is the rise, decline, and fall 
of the British empire itself and, in its aftermath, the emergence of a post­
colonial consciousness. In order more accurately to read works like Man.rjield 
Park, we have to see them in the main as resisting or avoiding that other 
setting, which their formal inclusiveness, historical honesty, and prophetic 
suggestiveness cannot completely hide. In time there would no longer be a 
dead silence when slavery was spoken of, and the subject became central to 
a new understanding of what Europe was. 
It would be silly to expect Jane Austen to treat slavery with anything like 
the passion of an abolitionist or a newly liberated slave. Yet what I have 
called the rhetoric of blame, so often now employed by subaltern, minority, 
or disadvantaged voices, attacks her, and others like her, retrospectively, for 
being white, privileged, insensitive, complicit. Yes, Austen belonged to a 
slave-owning society, but do we therefore jettison her novels as so many 
trivial exercises in aesthetic frumpery? Not at a!~ I would argue, if we take 
seriously our intellectual and interpretative vocation to make connections, 
to deal with as much of the evidence as possible, fully and actually, to read 
what is there or not there, above all, to see complementarity and interdepen­
dence instead of isolated, venerated, or formalized experience that excludes 
and forbids the hybridizing intrusions of human history. 
Man.rjield Parle is a rich work in that its aesthetic intellectual complexity 
requires that longer and slower analysis that is also required by its geograph­
ical problematic, a novel based in an England relying for the maintenance 
ofits style on a Caribbean island. When Sir Thomas goes to and comes from 
Antigua, where he has property, that is not at all the same thing as coming 
to and going from Mansfield Park, where his presence, arrivals, and depar­
tures have very considerable consequences. But precisely because Austen is 
so summary in one context, so provocatively rich in the other, precisely 
because of that imbalance we are able to-move in on the novel, reveal and 
accentuate the interdependence scarcely mentioned on its brilliant pages. A 
lesser work wears its historical affiliation more plainly; its worldliness is 
simple and direct, the way a jingoistic ditty during the Mahdist uprising or 
the 1857 Indian Rebellion connects directly to the situation and constituency 
that coined it. Man.rjield Park encodes experiences and does not simply The Cultural Integrity of Empire 97 
repeat them. From our later perspective we can interpret Sir Thomas's 
power to come and go in Antigua as stemming from the muted national 
experience of individual identity, behavior, and "ordination," enacted with 
such irony and taste at Mansfield Park. The task is to lose neither a true 
historical sense of the first, nor a full enjoyment or appreciation of the 
second, all the while seeing both together. 
( Ill ) 
The Cultural {ntegrity of Empire 
U ntil after the mid-nineteenth century the kind of easy yet sustained 
commerce between Mansfield Park (novel and place) and an overseas 
territory has little equivalent in French culture. Before Napoleon, there 
existed of course an ample French literature of ideas, travels, polemics, and 
speculation abOut the non-European world. One thinks of Volney, for in­
stance, or Montesquieu (some of this is discussed in Tzvetan Todorov's 
recent Nous et Jes autres). 51 Without significant exception this literature either 
was specialized-as, for example, in the Abbe Raynal's celebrated report on 
the colonies--or belonged to a genre (e.g., moral debate) that used such 
issues as mortality, slavery, or corruption as instances in a general argument 
about mankind. The Encyclopedists and Rousseau are excellent illustrations 
of this latter case. As traveller, memoirist, eloquent self-psychologist and 
romantic, Chateaubriand embodies an individualism of accent and style 
without peer; certainly, it would be very hard to show that in Renl or Atala 
he belonged to a literary institution like the novel, or to learned discourses 
such as historiography or linguistics. Besides, his narratives of American and 
Near Eastern life are too eccentric to be easily domesticated or emulated. 
France thus shows a somewhat fitful, perhaps even sporadic but certainly 
limited and specialized literary or cultural concern with those realms where 
traders, scholars, missionaries, or soldiers went and where in the East or the 
Americas they encountered their British counterparts. Before taking Algeria 
in r83o, France had no India and, I've argued elsewhere, it had momentarily 
brilliant experiences abroad that were returned to more in memory or 
literary trope than in actuality. One celebrated example is the Abbe Poiret's 
Lettres de Barlmrie (r78J), which describes an often uncomprehending but 
stimulating encounter between a Frenchman and Muslim Africans. The best 
intellectual historian of French imperialism, Raoul Girardet, suggests that CONSOLIDATED VISION 
between I8IJ and 187o colonial currents in France existed aplenty, but none 
of them dominated the others, or was situated prominently or crucially in 
French society. He specifies arms dealers, economists, the military, and 
missionary circles as responsible for keeping French imperial institutions 
alive domestically, although unlike Platt and other students of British impe­
rialism, Giradet cannot identify anything so evident as a French "depart­
mental view."sz 
About French literary culture it would be easy to draw the wrong conclu­
sions, and so a series of contrasts with England are worth listing. England's 
widespread, unspecialized, and easily accessible awareness of overseas inter­
ests has no direct French equivalent. The French equivalents of Austen's 
country gentry or Dickens's business people who make casual references to 
the Caribbean or India are not easily to be found. Still, in two or three rather 
specialized ways France's overseas interests appear in cultural discourse. 
One, interestingly enough, is the huge, almost iconic figure of Napoleon (as 
in Hugo's poem "Lui"), who embodies the romantic French spirit abroad, 
less a conqueror (which in fact he was, in Egypt) than a brooding,. melo­
dramatic presence whose persona acts as a mask through which reflections 
are expressed. Lukacs has astutely remarked on the tremendous influence 
exerted by Napoleon's career on those of novelistic heroes in French and 
Russian literature; in the early nineteenth century the Corsican Napoleon 
also has an exotic aura. 
Stendhal's young men are incomprehensible without him. In Le Rouge et 
lenoir Julien Sorel is completely dominated by his reading of Napoleon (in 
particular the St. Helena memoirs), with their fitful grandeur, sense of 
Mediterranean dash, and impetuous arrivi.rme. The replication of such an 
ambiance in Julien's career takes an extraordinary series of turns, all of them, 
in a France now marked by mediocrity and scheming reaction, deflating the 
Napoleonic legend without detracting from its power over Sorel. So power­
ful is the Napoleonic ambiance in Le Rouge et le noir that it comes as an 
instructive surprise to note that Napoleon's career is not direcdy alluded to 
anywhere in the noveL In fact the only reference to a world outside France 
comes after Mathilde has sent her declaration oflove to Julien, and Stendhal 
characterizes her Parisian existence as involving more risk than a voyage to 
Algeria. Typically, then, at exactly the moment in 183o when France secures 
its major imperial province, it turns up in a lone Stendhalian reference 
connoting danger, surprise, and a sort of calculated indifference. This is 
remarkably unlike the easy allusions to Ireland, India, and the Americas that 
slip in and out of British literature at the same time. · 
A second vehicle for culturally appropriating French imperial concerns is 
the set of new and rather glamorous sciences originally enabled by N a pole-The Cultural Integrity of Empire 99 
onic overseas adventures~ This perfectly reflects the social structure of 
French knowledge, dramatically unlike England's amateurish, often embar­
rassingly dffluuie intellectual life, The great institutes of learning in Paris 
(enhanced by Napoleon) have a dominating influence in the rise of ar­
cheology, linguistics, historiography, Orientalism, and experimemal ·biology 
(many of them actively participating in the Deicription de I'Eg;ypte). Typically, 
novelists cite academically regulated discourse about the East, India, and 
Africa-Balzac in La Peau de chagrin or La Cousine Bme, for instance-with 
a knowingness and sheen of expertise quite un-English. In the writings of 
British residents abroad, from Lady Wortley' Montagu ·to the Webbs, one 
finds a language of casual observation; and in colonial "experts" (like Sir 
Thomas Bertram and the Mills) a studied but basically unincorporated and 
unofficial attitude; in administrative or official prose, of which Macaulay's 
1835 Minute on Indian Education is a famous example, a haughty but 
still somehow personal obduracy. Rarely is any of this the case in early­
nineteenth-century French culture, where the official prestige of the acad­
emy and of Paris shape every utterance. 
As I have argued, the power even in casual conversation to represent what· 
is beyond metropolitan borders derives from the power of an imperial 
society, and that power takes the discursive form of a reshaping or reorder­
ing of "raw" or primitive data into the local conventions of European 
narrative and formal utterance, or, in the case of France, the systematics of 
disciplinary order. And th~se were under no obligation to please or persuade 
a "native" African, Indian, or Islamic audience: indeed they were in most 
influential instances premised on the silence of the native. When it came to 
what lay beyond metropolitan Europe, the arts and the disciplines of repre­
sentation-on the one hand, fiction, history and travel writing, painting; on 
the other, sociology, administrative or bureaucratic writing, philology, racial 
theory-depended on the powers of Europe to bring the non-European 
world into representations, the better to be able to see it, to master it, and, 
above all, to hold it. Philip Curtin's two-volume l111t1ge uf Africa and Bernard 
Smith's European Vision and the South Pacific are perhaps the most extended 
analyses of the practice available. A good popular characterization is pro­
vided by Basil Davidson in his survey of writing about Africa until the 
mid-twentieth century: 
The liter=1-ture of [African] exploration and conquest is as vast and 
varied as those processes themselves. Yet with a few outstanding excep­
tions the records are built uniquely to a single domination attitude: 
they are the journals of men who look at Africa resolutely from the 
outside. I am not saying that many of them could have been expected 100 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
to do otherwise: the important point is that the quality of their observa­
tion was circumscribed within a cramping limit, and they must be read 
today with this in mind. If they tried to understand the minds and 
actions of Africans they knew, it was by the way, and it was rare. Nearly 
all of them were convinced they were faced by "primeval man," by 
humanity as it had been before history began, by societies which 
lingered in the dawn of time. [Brian Street's important book The Savage 
in Literature details the steps by which in academic and popular litera­
ture this was shown to be true.] This point of view marched in step with 
Europe's overwhelming expansion of power and wealth, with its politi­
cal strength and resilience and sophistication, with its belief in some­
how being the· elected continent of God. What otherwise honorable 
explorers thought and did may be seen in the writings of men like 
Henry Stanley or in the actions of men like Cecil Rhodes and his 
mineral-hunting agents, ready as they were to represent themselves as 
· honest allies of their African friends so long as the treaties were 
secured-the treaties through which "effective occupation" could be 
proved to each other by the governments or private interests which 
they served and formed. n 
All cultures tend to make representations of foreign cultures the better to 
master or in some way control them. Yet not all cultures make representa­
tions of foreign cultures and in fact master or control them. This is the 
distinction, I believe, of modern Western cultures. It requires the study of 
Western knowledge or representations of the non-European world to be a 
study of both those representations and the political power they express. 
Late-nineteenth-century artists like Kipling and Conrad, or for that matter 
mid-century figures like Ger6me and Flaubert, do not merely reproduce the 
oudying territories: they work them out, or animate them, using narrative 
technique and historical and exploratory attitudes and positive ideas of the 
sort provided by thinkers like Max Muller, Renan, Charles Temple, Darwin, 
Benjamin Kidd, Emerich de Vattel. All of these developed and accentuated 
the essentialist positions in European culture proclaiming that Europeans 
should rule, non-Europeans be ruled. And Europeans did rule. 
We are now reasonably well aware ofhow dense this material is, and how 
widespread its influence. Take, for example, studies by Stephen Jay Gould 
and Nancy Stepan on the power of racial ideas in the world of nineteenth­
century scientific discovery, practice, and institutions. 54 As they show, there 
was no significant dissent from theories of Black inferiority, from hierarchies 
of advanced or undeveloped (later "subject") races. These conditions were 
either derived from or in many instances applied sometimes wordlessly to The Cultural Integrity of Empire IOI 
overseas territories where Europeans had what they regarded as direct 
evidence oflesser species. And even as European power grew disproportion­
ately with that of the enormous non-European imperium, so too grew the 
power of schemata that assured the white race its unchallenged authority. 
No area of experience was spared the unrelenting application of these 
hierarchies. In the system of education designed for India, students were 
taught not only English literature but the inherent superiority of the English 
race. Contributors to the emerging science of ethnographic observation in 
Africa, Asia, and Australia, as described by George Stocking, carried with 
them scrupulous tools of analysis and also an array of images, notions, 
quasi-scientific concepts about barbarism, primitivism, and civilization; in 
the nascent discipline of anthropology, Darwinism, Christianity, utilitarian­
ism, idealism, racial theory, legal history, linguistics, and the lore of intrepid 
travellers mingled in bewildering combination, none of which wavered, 
however, when it came to affirming the superlative values of white (i.e., 
English) civilization.ss 
The more one reads in this matter, and the more one reads the modem 
scholars on it, the more impressive is its fundamental insistence and repeti­
tiveness when it came to "others." To compare Carlyle's grandiose revalua­
tions of English spiritual life in Part anti Pretent, for instance, with what-he 
says about Blacks there or in his "Occasional Discourse on the Nigger 
Q!lestion" is to note two strikingly apparent factors. One is that Carlyle's 
energetic animadversions on revitalizing Britain, awakening it to work, 
organic connections, love of unrestricted industrial and capitalist develop­
ment, and the like do nothing to animate "Q!Jashee," the emblematic Black 
whose "ugliness, idleness, rebellion" are doomed forever to subhuman status. 
Carlyle is frank about this in The Nigger ~ertion: 
No: the gods wish besides pumpkins [the particular plant favored by 
Carlyle's "niggers"J, that spices and valuable products be grown in 
their West Indies; this much they have declared in so making the West 
lndies:----1nfinitely more they wish, that industrious men occupy their 
West Indies, not indolent two-legged cattle however "happy" over 
their abundant pumpkins! Both these things, we may be assured, the 
immortal gods have decided upon, passed their eternal Act of Parlia­
ment for: and both of them, though all terrestrial Parliaments and 
entities oppose it to the death, shall be done. Quashee, if he will not 
help in bringing-out the spices will get himself made a slave again 
(which state will be a little less ugly than his present one), and with 
beneficent whip, since other methods avail not, will be compelled to 
work.s 6 102 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
,The lesser species are offered nothing to speak of, while England-is 
expanding tremendously, its culture changing to one based upon industrial­
ization at home and protected free trade abroad. The status of the Black is 
decreed by "eternal Act of Parliament," so there is no real opportunity for 
self-help, upward mobility, or even something better than outright slavery 
(aldiough Carlyle says he opposes slavery). The question is whether Car­
lyle's logic and attitudes are entirely his own (and therefore eccentric) or 
whether they articulate, in an extreme and distinctive way, essential atti­
tudes that are not so very different from Austen's a few decades before or 
John Stuart Mill's a decade after. 
The similarities are remarkable, and the differences between the in­
dividuals equally great, for the whole weight of the culture made it hard to 
be otherwise. Neither Austen nor Mill offers a non-white Caribbean any 
status imaginatively, discursively, aesthetically, geographically, economi­
cally other than that of sugar producer in a permanently subordinate posi­
tion to the English. This, of course, is the concrete meaning of domination 
whose other side is productivity. Carlyle's Q!lashee is like Sir Thomas's 
Antiguan possessions: designed to produce wealth intended for English use. 
So the opportunity for Quashee to be silently there for Carlyle is equivalent 
to working obediently and unobtrusively to keep the British economy and 
trade going. 
The second thing to note about Carlyle's writing on the subject is that it 
is not obscure, or occult, or esoteric. What he means about Blacks he says, 
and he is also very frank about the threats and punishments he intends to . 
mete out. Carlyle speaks a language of total generality, anchored in·unshaka­
ble certainties about the essence of races, peoples, cultures, all of which need 
little elucidation because they are familiar to his audience. He speaks a lingua 
franca for metropolitan Britain: global, comprehensive, and with so vast a 
social authority as to be accessible to anyone speaking to and about the 
nation. This lingua franca locates England at the focal point of a world also 
presided over by its power, illuminated by its ideas and culture, kept pro­
ductive by the attitudes of its moral teachers, artistS, legislators. 
One hears similar accents in Macaulay in the 183os and then again four 
decades later, largely unchanged, in Ruskin, whose 187o Slade Lectures at 
Oxford begin with a solemn invocation to Engla'nd's destiny. This is worth 
quoting from at length, not because it shows Ruskin in a bad light, but 
because it frames nearly everything in Ruskin's copious writings on art. The 
authoritative Cook and Weddenburn edition of Ruskin's work includes a 
footnote to this passage underscoring its importance for him; he regarded it 
"as 'the most pregnant and essential' of all his teaching." 57 The Cultural Integrity of Empire 103 
There is a destiny now possible to us--the highest ever set before a 
nation to be accepted or refused. We are still undegenerate in race; a 
race mingled of th~ best northern blood. We are not yet dissolute in 
temper, but still have the firmness to govern, and the grace to obey. We 
have taught a religion of pure mercy, which we must either now betray, 
or learn to defend by fulfilling. And we are rich in an inheritance of 
honour, bequeathed to us through a thousand years of noble history, 
which it should be our daily thirst to increase with splendid avarice, so 
that Englishmen, 'if it be a sin to covet honour, should be the most 
offending souls alive. Within the last few years we have had the laws 
of natural science opened to us with a rapidity which has been blinding 
by its brightness; and means of transit and communication given to us, 
which have made but one kingdom of the habitable globe. One king­
dom;-but who is to be its king? Is there to be no king in it, think you, 
and every man to do that which is right in his own eyes? Or only kings 
of terror, and the obscene empires of Mammon and Belial? Or will you, 
youths of England, make your country again a royal throne of kings; a 
sceptred isle, for all the world a source of light, a centre of peace; 
mistress of Learning and of the Arts;-faithful guardian of great memo­
ries in the midst of irreverent and ephemeral visions;-faithful servant 
to time-tried principles, under temptation from fond experiments and 
licentious desires; and amidst the cruel and clamorous jealousies of the 
nations, worshipped in her strange valour of goodwill towards men? 
29. "Vexilla regis prodeunt." Yes, but of which king? There are the two 
oriflammes; which shall we plant on the farthest island,-the one that 
.floats in heavenly fire, or that hangs heavy with foul tissue of terrestrial 
gold? There is indeed a course of beneficent glory open to us, such as 
never was yet offered to any poor groups of mortal souls. But it must 
be--it is with us, now, "Reign or Die." And it shall be said of this 
country, "Fece per viltate, il gran rifiuto," that refusal of the crown will 
be, of all yet recorded in history, the shamefullest and most untimely. 
And this is what she must either do, or perish: she must found colonies 
as fast and as far as she is able, formed of her most energetic and 
worthiest men;-seizing every piece of fruitful waste ground she can 
set her foot on, and there teaching these her colonists that their chief 
virtue is to be fidelity to their country, and that their first aim is to be 
to advance the power ofEngland by land and sea: and that, though they 
live off a distant plot of ground, they are no more to consider them­
selves therefore disfranchised from their native land, than the sailors of 
her fieets do, because they float of distant waves. So that literally, these 104 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
colonies must be fastened fleets; and every man of them must be under 
authority of captains and officers, whose better command is to be over 
fields and streets instead of ships of the line; and England, in these her 
motionless navies (or, in the true and mightiest sense, motionless 
churches, ruled by pilots on the Galilean lake of all the world), is to 
"expect every man to do his duty"; recognizing that duty is indeed 
possible no less in peace than war; 11-nd that if we can get men, for little 
pay, to cast themselves against cannon-mouths for love of England, we 
may find men also who will plough and sow for her, who will behave 
kindly and righteously for her, who will bring up their children to love 
her, and who will gladden themselves in the brightness of her glory, 
more than in all the light of tropic skies. But that they may be able to 
do this, she must make her own majesty stainless; she must give them 
thoughts of their home of which they can be proud. The England who 
is to be mistress of half the earth, cannot remain herself a heap of 
cinders, trampled by contending and miserable crowds; she must yet 
again become the England she was once, and in all beautiful ways,­
more: so happy, so secluded, and so pure, that in her sky--polluted by 
no unholy clouds-she may be able to spell rightly of every star that 
heaven doth show; and in her fields, ordered and wide and fair, of every 
herb that ships the dew; and under the green avenues of her enchanted . 
garden, a sacred Circe, true J?aughter of the Sun, she must guide the 
human arts, and gather the divine knowledge, of distant nations, trans­
formed from savageness to manhood, and redeemed from despairing 
into peace.s 8 
Most, if not all, discussions of Ruskin avoid this passage. Yet, like Carlyle, 
Ruskin speaks plainly; his meaning, while draped in allusions and tropes, is 
unmistakable. England is to rule the world because it is the best; power is 
to be used; its imperial competitors are unworthy; its colonies are to in­
crease, prosper, remain tied to it. What is compelling in Ruskin's hortatory 
tones is that he not only believes fervently in what he is advocating, but also 
connects his political ideas about British world domination to his aesthetic 
and moral philosophy. Insofar as he believes passionately in the one, he also 
believes passionately in the other, the political and imperial aspect enfolding 
and in a sense guaranteeing the aesthetic and moral one. Because England 
is to be "king" of the globe, "a sceptred isle, for all the world a source of 
light," its youth are to be colonists whose first aim is to advance the power 
of England by land and sea; because England must do that "or perish," its art 
and culture depend, in Ruskin's view, on an enforced imperialism. The Cultural Integrity of Empire 105 
Simply ignoring these views-which are readily at hand in almost any 
text one looks at in the nineteenth century-is, I believe, like describing a 
road without its setting in the landscape. Whenever a cultural form or 
discourse aspired to wholeness or totality, most European writers, thinkers, 
politicians, and mercantilists tended to think in global terms. And these were 
not rhetorical flights but fairly accurate correspondences with their nations' 
actual and expanding global reach. In an especially trenchant essay on 
Tennyson, Ruskin's contemporary, and the imperialism of The Idylls of the 
King, V. G. Kiernan examines the quite staggering range of British overseas 
campaigns, all of them resulting in the consolidation or acquisition of terri­
torial gain, to which Tennyson was sometimes witness, sometimes (through 
relatives) directly connected. Since the list was contemporaneous with Rus­
kin's life, let us look at the items cited by Kiernan: · 
18)4-6 
18)4 
1856-6o 
1857 
185-r-8 
1865 
!866 
1870 
1871 
1874 
J88J. opium wars in China 
wars· against South African Kaffirs, New Zealand Maoris; 
conquest of Punjab 
the Crimean war 
conquest of lower Burma 
· second China war 
attack on Persia 
suppression of Indian Mutiny 
Governor Eyre case inJamaica 
Abyssinian expedition 
repulse of Fenian expansion in Canada 
Maori resistance destroyed 
decisive campaign ag3inst Ash antis in West Africa 
conquest of Egypt 
In addition, Kiernan refers to Tennyson as being "all for putting up with 
no nonsense from the Afghans." 59 What Ruskin, Tennyson, Meredith, Dick­
ens, Arnold, Thackeray, George Eliot, Carlyle, Mill-in short, the full roster 
of significant Victorian writers-saw was a tremendous international display 
of British power virtually unchecked over the entire world. It was both 
logical and easy to identify themselves in one way or another with this 
power, having through various means already identified themselves with 
Britain domestically. To speak of culrure, ideas, taste, morality, the family, 
history, art, and education as they did, to represent these subjects, try to 
influence them or intellectually and rhetorically mold them was perforce to 
recognize them on a world scale. The British international identity, the 106 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
scope of British mercantile and trade policy, the efficacy and mobility of 
British arms provided irresistible models to emulate, maps to follow, actions 
to live up to. 
Thus representations of what lay beyond insular or metropolitan bounda­
ries came, almost from the start, to confirm European power. There is an 
impressive circularity here: we are dominant because we have the power 
(industrial, technological, military, moral), and they don't, because of which 
they are not dominant; they are inferior, we are superior ... and so on and 
on. One sees this tautology holding with a particular tenacity in British 
views of Ireland and the Irish as early as the sixteenth century; it will operate 
during the eighteenth century with opinions about white colonists in Aus­
tralia and the Americas (Australians remained an inferior race well into the 
twentieth century); it gradually extends its sway to include practically the 
whole world beyond British shores. A comparably repetitive and inclusive 
tautology about what is overseas beyond France's frontiers emerges in 
French culture. At the margins of Western society, all the non-European 
regions, whose inhabitants, societies, histories, and beings represented a 
non-European essence, were made subservient to Europe, which in turn 
demonstrably continued to control what was not Europe, and represented 
the non-European in such a way as to sustain control. 
This sameness and circularity were far from being either inhibiting or 
repressive so far as thought, art, literature, and cultural discourse were 
concerned. This centrally important truth needs constantly to be insisted 
upon. The one relationship that does not change is the hierarchical 
one between the metropole and overseas generally, between European­
Western-white-Christian-male and those peoples who geographically and 
morally inhabit the realm beyond Europe (Africa, Asia, plus Ireland 
and Australia in the British case).60 Otherwise, a fantastic elaboration is 
permitted on both sides of the relationship, with the general result being 
that the identity of each is reinforced even as its variations on the West­
ern side increase. When the basic theme of imperialism is stated-for 
example, by writerS like Carlyle, who puts things very frankly-it gathers 
to it by affiliation a vast number of assenting, yet at the same time more 
interesting, cultural versions, each with its own inflections, pleasures, formal 
characteristics. 
The problem for the contemporary cultural critic is how to bring them 
together meaningfully. It is certainly true, as various scholars have shown, 
that an active consciousness of imperialism, of an aggressive, self-aware 
imperial mission, does not become inescapable----often accepted, referred to, 
actively concurred in-for European writers until the second part of the 
nineteenth century. (In England in the 186os it was often the case that the The Cultural Integrity of Empire 107 
word "imperialism" was used to refer, with some distaste, to France as a 
country ruled by an emperor.) 
But by the end of the nineteenth century, high or official culture still 
managed to escape scrutiny for its role in shaping the imperial dynamic and 
was mysteriously exempted from analysis whenever the causes, benefits, or 
evils of imperialism were discussed, as they were almost obsessively. This 
is one fascinating aspect of my subject--,-how culture participates in imperi­
alism yet is somehow excused for its ro)e. Hobson, for instance, speaks 
disparagingly of Giddings's incredible idea of'~retrospective consent" 61 (that 
subject people be subjugated first and then assumed retroactively to have 
consented to their enslavement), but he does not venture to ask where, or 
how, the idea arose with people such as Giddings, with their fluent jargon 
of self-congratulatory force. The great rhetoricians of theoretical justifica­
tion for: empire after 188o--in France, Leroy-Beaulieu, in England, Seeley­
deploy a language whose imagery of growth, fertility, and expansion, whose 
teleological strUcture of property and identity, whose ideological discrimi­
nation between "us" and "them" had already matured elsewhere--in fiction, 
political science, racial theory, travel writing. In colonies like the Congo and 
Egypt people such as Conrad, Roger Casement, and Wilfrid Scawen Blunt 
record the abuses and the almost mindlessly unchecked tyrannies of the 
white man, whereas at home Leroy-Beaulieu rhapsodizes that the essence of 
colonization: 
c'est dans l'ordre social ce qu'est dans l'ordre de Ia famille, je ne dis pas 
Ia generation seulement, mais I' education .... Elle mene a Ia virilite une 
nouvelle sortie de ses entrailles .... La formation des societes humaines, 
pas plus que Ia formation des hommes, ne doit ~tre abandonnee au 
hasard .... La colonisation est done un art qui se forme a !'ecole de 
)'experience .... Le but de Ia colonisation, c'est de mettre une societe 
nouvelle dans les meilleures conditions de prosperite et de progrh 62 
(the social order is like the familial order in which not only generation 
but education is important ... It gives to virility a new product from 
its entrails .... The formation of human societies, any more than the 
formation of men, must not be left to chance .... Therefore colonization 
is an art formed in the school of experience .... The goal of colonization 
is to place a new society in the best conditions for prosperity and 
progress.) 
In England by the late nineteenth century, imperialism was considered 
essential to the well-being of British fertility generally and of motherhood 
in particular; 63 and, as a close reading of Baden-Powell's career reveals, his 108 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
Boy Scout movement may be directly traced to the connection established 
between empire and the nation's health (fear of masturbation, degeneration, 
eugenics). 64 
There are hardly any exceptions then to the overwhelming prevalence of 
ideas suggesting, often ideologically implementing, imperial rule. Let us 
bring together what we can in a brief synthesis from a whole battery of 
modern studies in different fields of scholarly endeavor, in my opinion 
belonging together in the study of "culture and imperialism." This may be 
laid out systematically as follows: 
1. On the fundamental ontological distinction between the West and the 
rest of the world there is no disagreement. So strongly felt and perceived are 
the geographical and cultural boundaries between the West and its non­
Western peripheries that we may consider these boundaries absolute. With 
the supremacy of the distinction there goes what Johannes Fabian calls a 
denial of"coevalness" in time, and a radical discontinuity in terms of human 
space. 65 Thus "the Orient," Africa, India, Australia are places dominated by 
Europe, although populated by different species. 
z.. With the rise of ethnography-as described by Stocking, and also as 
demonstrated in linguistics, racial theory, historical classification-there is 
a codification of difference, and various evolutionary schemes going from 
primitive to subject races, and finally to superior or civilized peoples. Gobi­
neau, Maine, Renan, Humboldt are centrally important. Such commonly 
used categories as the primitive, savage, degenerate, natural, unnatural also 
belong here. 66 
3· Active domination of the non-Western world by the West, now a 
canonically accepted branch of historical research, is appropriately global in 
its scope (e.g., K. M. Panikar, Asia and Western Dominance, or Michael Ad as, 
Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, Technolof:Y, and Ideologies of Western 
Dominance). 61 There is a convergence berween the great geographical scope 
of the empires, especially the British one, and universalizing cultural dis­
courses. Power makes this convergence possible, of course; with it goes the 
ability to be in far-flung places, to learn about other people, to codify and 
disseminate knowledge, to characterize, transport, install, and display in­
stances or'other cultures (through exhibits, expeditions, photographs, paint­
ings, surveys, schools), and above all to rule them. All this in turn produces 
what has been called "a duty" to natives, the requirement in Africa and 
elsewhere to establish colonies for the "benefit" of the natives 68 or for the 
"prestige" of the mother country. The rhetoric of Ia mission civilisatrice. 
4· The domination is not inert, but informs metropolitan cultures in many 
ways; in the imperial domain itself, its influence is only now beginning ro be 
studied on even the minutiae of daily life. A series of recent works 69 has The Cultural Integrity of Empi're 109 
described the imperial motif woven into the structures of popular culture, 
fiction, and the rhetoric of history, philosophy, and geography. Thanks to the 
work ofGauri Viswanathan, the system of British education in India, whose 
ideology derives from Macaulay and Bentinck, is seen to be permeated with 
ideas about unequal races and cultures that were transmitted in the class­
room; they were part of the curriculum and a pedagogy whose purpose, 
according to Charles Trevelyan, an apologist, was 
in a Platonic sense, to awaken the colonial subjects to a memory of their 
innate character, corrupted as it had become ... through the feudalistic 
character of Oriental society. In this universalizing narrative, rescripted 
from a scenario furnished earlier by missionaries, the British govern­
ment was refashioned as the ideal republic to which Indians must 
natUrally aspire as a spontaneous expression of self, a state in which the 
British rulers won a figurative place as Platonic Guardians. 70 
Since I am discussing an ideological vision implemented and sustained 
not only by direct domination and physical force but much more effectively 
over a long time by penuasive meani, the quotidian processes of hegemony­
very often creative, inventive, interesting, and above all executive--yield 
surprisingly well to analysis and elucidation. At the most visible level there 
was the physical transformation of the imperial realm, whether through what 
Alfred Crosby calls "ecological imperialism," 71 the reshaping of the physical 
environment, or administrative, architectural, and institutional feats such as 
the building of colonial cities (Algiers, Delhi, Saigon); at home, the emer­
gence of new imperial elites, cultures, and subcultures (schools of imperial 
"hands," institutes, departments, sciences-such as geography, anthropol­
ogy, etc.--dependent on a continuing colonial policy), new styles of art, 
including travel photography, exotic and Orientalist painting, poetry, fic­
tion, and music, monumental sculpture, and journalism (as memorably char­
acterized by Maupassant's Bei-Ami,Yz 
The underpinnings of such hegemony have been studied with considera­
ble insight in works such as Fabian's Language anti Colonial PO'Wer, Ranajit 
Guha's A Rule uf Property for Bengal, and, as part of the Hobsbawm and Ranger 
collection, Bernard Cohn's "Representing Authority in Victorian India" 
(also his remarkable studies on the British representation and surveying of 
Indian society in An Anthropologiit Among the HiitorianJ'). 73 These works show 
the daily imposition of power in the dynamics of everyday life, the back­
and-forth of interaction among natives, the white man, and the institutions 
of authority. But the important factor in these micro-physics of imperialism 
is that in passing from "communication to command" and back again, a 110 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
unified discourse--or rather, as Fabian puts it, "a field of passages, of cross­
ing and criss-crossing ideas"7~evelops that is based on a distinction 
between the Westerner and the native so integral and adaptable as to make 
change almost impossible. We sense the anger and frustration this produced 
over time from Fanon's comments on the Manicheanism of the colonial 
system and the consequent need for violence. 
S· The imperial attitudes had scope and authority, but also, in a period of 
expansion abroad and social dislocation at home, great creative power. I 
refer here not only to "the invention of tradition" generally, but also to the 
capacity to produce strangely autonomous intellectual and aesthetic images. 
Orientalist, Africanist, and Americanist discourses developed, weaving in 
and out of historical writing, painting, fiction, popular culture. Foucault's 
ideas about ducourses are apt here; and, as Bernal has described it, a coherent 
classical philology developed during the nineteenth century that purged 
Attic Greece of its Semitic-African roots. In time--as Ronald Inden's Imag­
ining India75 tries to show--entire semi-independent metropolitan forma­
tions appeared, having to do with imperial possessions and their interests. 
Conrad, Kipling, T. E. Lawrence, Malraux are among its narrators; its 
ancestors and curators include Clive, Hastings, Dupleix, Bugeaud, Brooke, 
Eyre, Palmerston, Jules Ferry, Lyautey, Rhodes; in these-and the great 
imperial narratives (Tbe Sroen Pillars of Wudom, Heart of Darkness, Lord Jim, 
Nostromo, La Voie·royale), an imperial personality becomes distinct. The dis­
course of late-nineteenth-century imperialism is further fashioned by the 
arguments of Seeley, Dilke, Froude, Leroy-Beaulieu, Harmand, and others, 
many of them forgotten and unread today, but powerfully influential, even 
prophetic then. 
The images of Western imperial authority remain-haunting, strangely 
attractive, compelling: Gordon at Khanoum, fiercely staring down the Suda­
nese dervishes in G. W.Joy's famous painting, armed only with revolver and 
sheathed sword; Conrad's Kurtz in the center of Africa, brilliant, crazed, 
doomed, brave, rapacious, eloquent; Lawrence of Arabia, at the head of his 
Arab warriors, living the romance of the desen, inventing guerilla warfare, 
hobnobbing with princes and statesmen, translating Homer, and ttying to 
hold on to Britain's "Brown Dominion"; Cecil Rhodes, establishing coun­
tries, estates, funds as easily as other men might have children or start 
businesses; Bugeaud, bringing Abdel ~der's forces to heel, making Algeria 
French; the concubines, dancing girls, odalisques of Gerome, Delacroix's 
Sardanapalus, Matisse's Nonh Africa, Saint-Saens's Samson and Delilah. The 
list is long and its treasures massive. The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida III 
( IV ) 
The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida 
I should like now to demonstrate how fa~ and how inventively this mate­
rial affects certain areas of cultural activity, even those realms not today 
associated with sordid imperial exploitation. We are fortunate that several 
young scholars have developed the study of imperial power su.fficiently so 
as to let us observe the aesthetic component involved in the survey and 
administration of Egypt and India. I have in mind, for example, Timothy 
Mitchell's Colonising Egypt,16 where it is shown that the practice of building 
model ~illages, discovering the intimacy of harem life, and instituting new 
modes of military behavior in an ostensibly Ottoman, but really European, 
colony not only reconfirmed European power, but also produced the added 
pleasure of surveying and ruling the place. That bond between power and 
pleasure in imperial rule is marvelously demonstrated by Leila Kinney and 
Zeynep <;elik in their study of belly-dancing, where the quasi-ethnographic 
displays afforded by European expositions in fact came to be associated with 
consumerist leisure based in Europe. 77 Two related offshoots of this are 
excavated in T. J. Clark's study of Manet and other Parisian painters, The 
Painting of Modern Life, in particular the emergence of unusual leisure and 
eroticism in metropolitan France, some of it affected by exotic models; and 
Malek Alloula's deconstructive reading of early-twentieth-century French 
postcards of Algerian women, Tbe Colonial Harem. 18 Obviously the Orient as 
a place of promise and power is very important here. 
I want to suggest, however, why it is that my attempts at a contrapuntal. 
reading are perhaps eccentric or odd. First, although I proceed along gener­
ally chronological lines, from the beginning to the end of the nineteenth 
century, I am not in fact trying to provide a consecutive· sequence of events, 
trends, or works. Each individual work is seen in terms both of its own past 
and of later interpretations. Second, the overall argument is that ·these 
cultural works which interest me irradiate and interfere with apparently 
stable and impermeable categories founded on genre, periodization, nation­
ality, or style, those categories presuming that the West and its culture are 
largely independent of other cultures, and of the worldly pursuits of powef, 
authority, privilege, and dominance. Instead, I want to show that the "struc­
ture of attitude and reference" is prevalent and influential in all sorts of 
ways, forms, and places, even well before the officially designated age of 112 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
empire; far from being autonomous or transcendent, it is close to the histori­
cal world; and far from being fixed and pure, it is hybrid, partaking of racial 
superiority as much as of artistic brilliance, of political as of technical 
authority, of simplifyingly reductive as of complex techniques. 
Consider Aida, Verdi's famous "Egyptian" opera. As a visual, musical, and 
theatrical spectacle, Aida does a great many things for and in European 
culture, one of which is to confirm the Orient as an essentially exotic, distant, 
and antique place in which Europeans can mount certain shows of force. 
Concurrently with the composition of Aida, European "universal'' exposi­
tions routinely contained models of colonial villages, towns, courts, and the 
like; the malleability and transportability of secondary or lesser cultures was 
underlined. These subaltern cultures were exhibited before Westerners as 
microcosms of the larger imperial domain. Little, if any, allowance was made 
for the non-European except within this framework. 79 
Aida is synonymous with "grand opera" of the uniquely high nineteenth­
century type. Along with a very small group of others, it has survived for 
more than a century both as an immensely popular work and as one for 
which musicians, critics, and musicologists have a healthy respect. Yet Aida's 
grandeur and eminence, although evident to anyone who has seen or heard 
it, are complex matters about which all sons of speculative theories exist, 
mostly about what connects Aida to its historical and cultural moment in the 
West. In Opera: The Extravagant Art, Herbert Lindenberger puts forward the 
imaginative theory that Aida, Boris Godunov, and GOtterdammerung are operas 
of 187o, tied respectively to archeology, nationalist historiography, and 
philology. 80 Wieland Wagner, who produced Aida at Berlin in 1962, treats the 
opera, in his words, as "an African mystery." He sees in it a prefiguration of 
his grandfather's Tristan, with an irreducible conflict at its core between 
Ethos and Bios ("Verdis Aida ist ein Drama des anaufl<>sbaren Konflikts 
zwischen Ethos und Bios, zwischen dem moralischer Gesetz und den For­
derungen des Lebens"). 81 In his scheme, Amneris is the central figure, 
dominated by a "Riesenphallus," which hangs over her like a mighty dub; 
according to Opera, "Aida was mostly seen prostrate or cowering in the 
background." 82 
Even if we overlook the vulgarity to which the famous Triumphal scene 
in Act II has often lent itself, we should note that Aida climaxes a develop­
ment in style and vision that brought Verdi from Nabucco and I Lombardi in 
the 184os, through Rigoletto, Trovatore, Traviata, Simon Boccanegra, and Un Ballo 
in Maschera in the r8sos, to the problematic Forza del Dertino and Don Carlos 
in the 186os. During three decades Verdi had become the pre-eminent Italian 
composer of his day, his career accompanying and seeming to comment on 
the Risorgimento. Aida was the last public and political opera he wrote The Empire at Work: V erdi'r Aida 
before he turned to the essentially domestic, albeit intense pair of operas 
with which he ended his composing life, Otello and Falstaff. All the major 
Verdi scholars-Julian Budden, Frank Walker, William Weaver, Andrew 
Potter, Joseph W echsberg-note that Aida not only reuses traditional music 
forms like the cabaletta and concertato but adds to them a new chromaticism, 
subtlety of orchestration, and dramatic streamlining not found in the work 
of any other composer of the time except Wagner. Joseph Kerman's demur­
ral, in Opera as Drama, is interesting for how much it acknowledges about 
Aida's singularity: 
The result in Aida is, in my opinion, an almost constant disparity 
between the particular glib simplicity of the libretto and the alarming 
complexity of the musical expression-for of course Verdi's technique 
had never been so rich. Only Amneris comes to life; Aida is thoroughly 
confused; Rhadames seems like a throwback, if not to Metastasio, at 
least to Rossini. It goes without saying that some pages, numbers, and 
scenes. are beyond praise, reason enough for this opera's great popular­
ity. Nevenheless, there is a curious falsity about Aida which is quite 
unlike Verdi, and which recalls Meyerbeer more disturbingly than the 
grand-opera· apparatus of triumphs, consecrations, and brass bands. 83 
This is undeniably persuasive as far as it goes; Kerman is correct about 
Aidds falsity, but he cannot quite explain what causes it. We should remem­
ber first of all that Verdi's previous work attracted attention because it 
involved and drew in its mostly Italian audience directly. His music-dramas 
portrayed incorrigibly red-blooded heroes and heroines in the full splendor 
of contests (often incestuous) over power, fame, and honor, but-as Paul 
Robinson has convincingly argued in Opera and /deaJ'-they were almost all 
intended as political operas, replete with rhetorical stridency, martial music, 
and unbuttoned emotions. "Perhaps the most obvious component ofVerdi's 
rhetorical style--to put the matter bluntly-is sheer loudness. He is with 
Beethoven, among the noisiest of all major composers .... Like a political 
orator, Ve.rdi can't remain still for long. Drop the needle at random on a 
recording of a Verdi opera, and you will usually be rewarded with a substan­
tial racket." 84 Robinson goes on to say that Verdi's splendid noisiness is 
effectively harnessed to such occasions as "parades, rallies and speeches",as 
which during the Risorgimento were heard as Verdi's amplifications of 
real-life occurrences. (Aida is no exception, with, for example, early in Act 
II the tremendous ensemble piece "Su del nilo," for several soloists and a 
massed chorus.) It is now commonplace knowledge that tunes in Verdi's 
earlier operas (Nabucco, I Lombard~ and Anita in particular) stimulated his II4 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
audiences to frenzies of participation, so immediate was their impact, the 
clarity of their contemporary reference, and the sheer skill of his efficiency 
at whipping everyone into urgent, big theatrical climaxes. 
Whereas it had been Italy and Italians (with special force, paradoxically 
enough, in Nabucco) who were addressed in Verdi's earlier operas, despite the 
often exotic or outre subject matter, in Aida it was Egypt and Egyptians of 
early antiquity, a far remoter and less engaging phenomenon than Verdi had 
ever set to music. Not that Aida wants for his customary political noisiness, 
for surely Act II, scene 2 (the so-called Triumphal scene) is the biggest thing 
Verdi wrote for the stage, a virtual jamboree of everything an opera house 
can collect and parade. But Aida is self-limiting, atypically held in, and there 
is no record of any participatory enthusiasm connected with it, even though 
at New York's Metropolitan Opera, for instance, it has been performed more 
times than any other work. Verdi's other works that dealt with remote or 
alien cultures did not inhibit his audiences from identifying with them 
anyway, and, like the earlier operas, Aida is about a tenor and a soprano who 
want to make love but are prevented by a baritone and a mezzo. What are 
the differences in Aida. and why did Verdi's habitual mix produce so unusual 
a blend of masterly competence and affective neutrality? 
The circumstances of Aida's first production and under which it was 
written are unique in Verdi's career. The political and certainly the cultural 
setting in which Verdi worked between early x87o and late 1871 included not 
only Italy, but imperial Europe and viceregal Egypt, an Egypt technically 
within the 'Onoman Empire but now gradually being established as a depen­
dent and subsidiary part of Europe. Aida's peculiarities--its subject matter 
and setting, its monumental grandeur, its strangely unaffecring visual and 
musical effects, its overdeveloped music and constricted domestic situation, 
its eccentric place in Verdi's career-require what I have been calling a 
contrapuntal interpretation, assimilable neither to the standard view of 
Italian opera nor more generally to prevailing views of the great master­
pieces of nineteenth-century European civilization. Aida, like the opera form 
itself, is a hybrid, radically impure work that belongs equally to the history 
of culture and the historical experience of overseas domination. It is a 
composite work, built around disparities and discrepancies that have been 
either ignored or unexplored, that can be recalled and mapped descriptively; 
they are interesting in and of themselves, and they make more sense of Aida's 
unevenness, its anomalies, its restrictions and silences, than analyses of the 
kind that focus on Italy and European culture exclusively. 
I shall put before the reader material that paradoxically cannot be over­
looked but systematically has been. This is mostly because the embarrass­
ment of Aida is finally that it is not so much about but ofimperial domination. The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida IIJ 
Similarities with Jane Austen's work-equally improbable as an involved 
with empire--will emerge. If one interprets Aida from that perspective, 
aware that the opera was written for and first produced in an African country 
with which Verdi had no connection, a number of new features will stand 
out. 
Verdi himself says something to this effect in a letter that iJ}augurates his 
as yet almost completely latent connection with an Egyptian opera. Writing 
to Camille du Lode, a close friend who had just returned from a voyage en 
Orient, Verdi remarks on February 19, 1868: "When we see each other, you 
must-describe all the events of your voyage: the wonders you have seen, and 
the beauty and ugliness of a country which once had a greatness and a 
civilization I had never been able to admire." 86 
On November 1, 1869, the inauguration of the Cairo Opera House was a 
brilliant event during celebrations for the opening of the Suez Canal; Rigo­
lmo was the opera performed. A few weeks before, Verdi had turned down 
Khedive Ismail's offer to write a hymn for the occasion, and in December 
he wrote du Lode a long letter on the dangers of "patchwork" operas: "I 
want art in any of its manifestations, not the aTrangement, the artifice, and t~e 
tyrtem that you prefer," he said, arguing that for his part he wanted "unified" 
works, in which "the idea is ONE, and everything must converge to form 
this ONE." 87 Although these assertions were made in response to du Lode's 
suggestions that Verdi write an opera for Paris, they tum up enough times 
in the course of his work on Aida to become an imponant theme. On January 
5, 1871, he wrote Nicola de Giosa, "Today operas are written with so many 
different dramatic and musical intentions that it is almost impossible to 
interpret them; and it seems to me that no one can take offense if the author, 
when one of his productions is given for the first rime, sends a person who 
has carefully studied the work under the direction of the author himself." 88 
To Ricordi he wrote on April n, 1871, that he permitted "only one creator" 
for his work, himself, "I don't concede the right to 'create' to singers and 
conductors because, as I said before, it is a principle that leads into the 
abyss." 89 
Why, then, did Verdi finally accept Khedive Ismail's offer to write a 
special opera for Cairo? Money cenainly was a reason: he was given IJo,ooo 
francs in gold. He was also flattered, since after all he was choice number 
one, ahead of Wagner and Gounod. Just as imponant, I think, was the story 
offered him by du Lode, who had received a sketch for a possible operatic 
treatment from Auguste Mariette, a renowned French Egyptologist. On May 
26, 187o, Verdi had indicated in a letter to du Lode that he had read "the 
Egyptian outline," that it was well done, and that "it offers a splendid 
mise-en-scene. "90 He had noted also that the woxk shows "a very expen hand n6 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
in it, one accustomed to writing and one who knows the theatre very well." 
By early June he began work on Aida, immediately expressing his impatience 
to Ricordi at how slowly things were progressing, even as he requested the 
services of one Antonio Ghislanzoni as librettist. "These things should be 
done very fast," he says at this point 
In the simple, intense, and above all authentically "Egyptian" scenarios by 
Mariette, Verdi perceived a unitary intention, the imprint or trace of a 
masterly and expert will that he hoped to match in music. At a time when 
his career had been marked with disappointments, unfulfilled intentions, 
unsatisfying collaborations with impresarios, ticket sellers; singers--the 
Paris premiere of Don Carlos was a recent, still smarting instance--Verdi saw 
a chance to create a work whose every detail he could supervise from 
beginning sketch to opening.night. In addition, he was to be supported in this 
enterprise by royalty: indeed, du Lode suggested that the Viceroy not only 
desperately wanted the piece for himself, but also had helped Mariette in 
writing it. Verdi could assume that a wealthy Oriental potentate had j_oined 
with a genuinelybrilliant and single-minded Western archeologist to give 
him an occasion in which he could be a commanding and undistracted 
artistic presence. The story's alienating Egyptian provenance and setting 
paradoxically seem to have stimulated his sense of technical mastery. 
So far as I have been able to ascertain, Verdi had no feelings at all about 
modern Egypt, in contrast with his fairly developed notions about Italy, 
France, and Germany, even though during the two years he worked on the 
opera he kept getting assurances that he was doing something for Egypt on 
a national level, as it were. Draneht Bey (ne Pavlos Pavlidis), the Cairo 
Opera manager, told him this, and Mariette, who came to Paris to get 
costumes and scenery ready in the summer of 187o (and was subsequently 
caught there during the Franco-Prussian War), frequently reminded him 
that no expense was being spared to mount a truly spectacular show. Verdi 
was intent on getting words and music right, making certain that Ghislan­
zoni found the perfect "theatrical word," parola scenica, 91 overseeing per­
formance details with unflagging attention. In the immensely complicated 
negotiations for casting the first Amneris, Verdi's contribution to the im­
broglio earned him the title of "the world's foremost Jesuit."92 Egypt's 
submissive or at least indifferent presence in his life allowed him to pur­
sue his artistic intentions with what appeared to be an uncompromising 
intensity. 
But I believe Verdi fatally confused this complex and in the end col­
laborative capacity to bring a distant operatic fable to life with the Romantic 
ideal of an organically integrated, seamless work of art, informed only by the 
aesthetic intention of a single creator. Thus an imperial notion of the artist The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida 117 
dovetailed conveniently with an imperial notion of a non-European world 
whose claims on the European composer were either minimal or non­
existent. To Verdi the conjunction must have seemed to be eminently worth 
nursing along. For years subject to the obtrusive vagaries of opera house 
personnel, he could now rule his domain unchallenged; as he prepared the 
opera for performance in Cairo and a couple of months later (February 187l) 
for its Italian premiere at La Scala, he was told by Ricordi that "you will be 
the Moltke of La Scala" (September l, 1871).93 So strong were the attractions 
of this martially dominating role that a~ one point, in a letter to Ricordi, 
Verdi explicitly connects his aesthetic aims with Wagner's and, more sig­
nificantly, with Bayreuth (as yet only a theoretical proposal), over whose 
performances Wagner intended himself to have virtually total dominion. 
The seating arrangement of the orchestra· is of much greater impor­
tance than is commonly believed-for the blending of the instruments, 
for the sonority, and for the effect. These small improvements will 
afterward open the way for other innovations, which will surely come 
one day; among them taking the spectators' boxes off the stage, bringing 
the curtain to the footlights; another, making the orche1tra invi1ible. This 
is not my idea but Wagner's. It's excellent. It seems impossible that 
today we tolerate the sight of shabby tail.r and white ties, for example, 
mixed with Egyptian, Assyrian and Druidic costumes, etc., etc., and, 
even more, almost in the middle of the floor, of seeing the tops of the 
harps, the necks of the double basses and the baton of the conductor all 
~~~~~ . 
Verdi speaks here of a theatrical presentation removed from the customary 
interferences of opera houses, removed and isolated in such a way as to 
impress the audience with a novel blend of authority and verisimilitude. The 
parallels are evident with what Stephen Bann, in The Clothing of Clio, has 
called "the historical composition of place" in historical writers like Walter 
Scott and Byron. 95 The difference is that Verdi could and indeed, for the first 
time in European opera, did avail himself of Egyptology's historical vision 
and academic authority. This science was embodied at close hand for Verdi 
in the person of Auguste Mariette, whose French nationality and training 
were part of a crucial imperial genealogy. Verdi perhaps had no way of 
knowing much in detail about Mariette, but he was strongly impressed by 
Mariette's initial scenario and recognized a qualified expert whose compe­
tence could represent ancient Egypt with a legitimate credibility. 
The simple point to be made here is that Jgyptology is Egyptology and 
not Egypt. Mariette was made possible by two important predecessors, both n8 .CONSOLIDATED VISION 
French, both imperial, both reconstructive, and, if I can use a word that I 
shall borrow from Northrop Frye, both presentational: the first is the archeo­
logical volumes of Napoleon's Description de J'Egypte; and the second is Cham­
pollion's deciphering of hieroglyphics presented in 1822 in his Lettre a M. 
Dacier and in 18z4 in his Precis du systeme hieroglyphique. By "presentational" 
and "reconstructive" I mean a number of characteristics that seemed tailor­
made for Verdi: Napoleon's military expedition to Egypt was motivated by 
a desire to capture Egypt, to threaten the British, to demonstrate French 
power; but Napoleon and his scholarly experts were there also to put Egypt 
before Europe, in a s~nse to stage its antiquity, its wealth of associations, 
cultural importance, and unique aura for a European audience. Yet this could 
not be done without an aesthetic as well as a political intention. What 
Napoleon and his teams found was an Egypt whose antique dimensions were 
screened by the Muslim, Arab, and even Ottoman presence standing every­
where between the invading French army and ancient Egypt. How was one 
. to get to that other, older, and more prestigious part? 
Here began the particularly French aspect of Egyptology, which 
continued in the work of Champollion and Mariette. Egypt had to be 
reconstructed in models or drawings, whose scale, projective grandeur (I say 
"projective" because as you leaf through the Description you know that what 
you are looking at are drawings, diagrams, paintings of dusty, decrepit, and 
neglected pharaonic sites looking ideal and splendid as if there were no 
modern Egyptians but only European spectators), and exotic distance were 
truly unprecedented. The reproductions of the Description therefore are not 
descriptions but ascriptions. First the temples and palaces were reproduced 
in an orientation and perspective that staged the actuality of ancient Egypt 
as reflected through the imperial eye; then-since all of them were empty 
or lifeless--in the words of Ampere, they had to be made to speak, and 
hence the efficacy of Champollion's decipherment; then, finally, they could 
be dislodged from their context and transported to Europe for use there. 
This, as we shall see, was Mariette's contribution. 
This continuous process went on roughly from 1798 until the r86os, and 
it is French. Unlike England, which had India, and Germany, which, at a 
remove, had the organized learning that went with Persia and India, France 
had this rather imaginative and enterprising field in w~ich, as Raymond 
Schwab says in The On"ental Renaissance, scholars "from Rouge to Mariette at 
the end of the line [started by Champollion's work] ... were ... explorers 
with isolated careers who learned everything on their own." 96 The Napole­
onic savants were explorers who learned everything on their own, since 
there was no .body of organized, truly modern and scientific knowledge 
about Egypt on which they could draw. As Martin Bernal has characterized The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida 
it, although t~e prestige of Egypt throughout the eighteenth century was 
considerable, it was associated with esoteric and mystifying currents like 
Masonry. 97 Champollion and Mariette were eccentrics and autodidacts, but 
they were moved by scientific and rationalistic energies. The meaning of this 
in the ideological terms of Egypt's presentation in French archeology is that 
Egypt could be described "as the first and essential oriental influence on the 
West," a claim that Schwab quite rightly regards as false, since it igQores 
Orientalist work done by European scholars on, other parts of the ancient 
world. In any event, Schwab says: 
Writing in the Re7!ue des Deux-Mondes in June 1868 [just at the point that 
Draneht, Khedive Ismail, and Mariette began to conceive of what was 
to become Aida] Ludovic Vitet hailed "the unparalleled discoveries" of 
the orientalists over the preceding fifty years. He even spoke of "the 
archeological revolution for which the Orient is the theatre," but 
calmly asserted that "the movement started with Champollion and 
everything began because of him. He is the point of departure for all 
these discoveries." Vitet's own progression following the one already 
established in the public mind; he then passed on to the Assyrian 
monuments and finally to a few words on the Vedas. Vitet did not 
linger. Clearly, after Napoleon's expedition to Egypt, the monuments 
there and the scholarly missions to Egyptian sites had already spoken 
to everyone. India never revived except on paper. 98 
Auguste Mariette's career is significant for Aida in many interesting ways. 
Although there has been some dispute about his exact contribution to the 
Aida libretto, his intervention has been vindicated definitively by Jean Hum­
bert as the important inaugurating one for the opera. 99 (Immediately behind 
the libretto was his role as principal designer of antiquities at the Egyptian 
pavilion in the Paris International Exhibition of 1867, one of the greatest and 
earliest displays of imperial potency.) 
Although archeology, grand opera, an4 the European universal exposi­
tions are obviously different worlds, someone like Mariette connects them 
in suggestive ways. There is a perspicacious account of what might have 
made possible Mariette's passages between the three worlds: 
The universal expositions of the nineteenth century were intended as 
microcosms that would summarize the entire human experienc~past 
and present, with projections into the future. In their carefully ar­
ticulated order, they also signified the dominant relation of power. 
Ordering and characterization ranked, rationalized, and objectified dif-/ .. 120 CONSOLlDATED VISION 
ferent societies. The resulting hierarchies ponrayed a world where 
races, sexes, and nations occupied fixed places assigned to them by the 
exposition committees of host countries. The forms through which 
non-Western cultures were represented at the fairs were predicated 
upon the social arrangements already established in the "host" culture, 
France; thus it is imponant to describe the parameters for they set the 
patterns of national representation and provided the channels of cul­
tural expression through which the knowledge produced by the exposi­
tions would be fashioned. 1oo 
In the catalogue he wrote for the 1867 exhibition, Mariette rather strenu­
ously stressed the reconstructive aspects, leaving little doubt in anyone's mind 
that he, Mariette, had brought Egypt to Europe for the first time, as it were. 
He could do so because of his spectacular archeological successes at some 
thirty-five sites, including those at Giza, Sakkaiah, Edfu, and Thebes where, 
in Brian Fagan's apt words, he "excavated with complete abandon." 101 In 
. addition, Mariette was engaged regularly in both excavating and emptying 
sites, so that as the European museums (especially the Louvre) grew in 
Egyptian treasure, Mariette rather cynically displayed the actual tombs in 
Egypt empty, keeping a bland composure in his explanations to "disap­
pointed Egyptian oflicials." 102 
In service to the Khedive, Mariette encountered Ferdinand de Lesseps, 
the canal's architect. We know that the two collaborated in various restora­
tive and curatorial schemes, and I am convinced that both men had a similar 
vision-perhaps going back to earlier Saint-Simonian, Masonic, and thea­
sophie European ideas about Egypt-out of which they spun their quite 
extraordinary schemes, whose effectiveness, it is important to note, was 
increased by the alliance in each of them of personal will, a penchant for 
theatricality, and scientific dispatch. 
Mariette's libretto for Aida led to his design for costumes and sets, and 
this, in turn, back to the remarkably prophetic scenic designs of the DeJ"crip­
tion. The most striking pages of the Description seem to beseech some very 
grand actions or personages to fill them, and their emptiness and scale look 
like opera sets waiting to be populated. Their implied European context is 
a theater of power and knowledge, while their actual Egyptian setting in the 
nineteenth century has simply dropped away. 
The temple at Phylae as rendered in the De.rcription (and not a supposed 
original at Memphis) was almost certainly in Mariette's mind as he designed 
the first scene in Aida, and although it is unlikely that Verdi saw these very 
prints, he did see reproduced versions of them that circulated widely in 
Europe; having seen them made it easier for him to house the loud military The Empire at Work: Verdii Aida 121 
music that occurs so frequently in Aida's first two acts. It is also likely that 
Mariette's notions about costumes came from illustrations in the Deicription 
which he adapted for the opera, though there are substantial differences. I 
think that Mariette had in his own mind's eye transmuted the pharaonic 
originals into a rough modern equivalent, into what pre-historic Egyptians 
would look like accoutered in styles prevalent in r87o: Europeanized faces, 
moustaches, and beards are the giveaway. , 
The result was an Orientalized Egypt, which Verdi had arrived at in the 
music quite on his own. Well-known examples occur mostly in the second 
act: the chant of the priestess and, a littie later, the ritual dance. We know 
that Verdi was most concerned with the accuracy of this scene, since it 
required the most authentication and caused him to ask the most detailed 
historical questions. A document sent by Ricordi to Verdi in the summer of 
187o contains material on ancient Egypt, of which the most detailed was 
about consecrations, priestly rites, and other facts concerning ancient Egyp­
tian religion. Verdi used little of it, but the sources are indicative of a 
generalized European awareness of the Orient as derived from Volney and 
Creuzer, to which was added Champollion's more recent archeological 
work. All of this, however, concerns priests: no women are mentioned. 
Verdi does two things to this material. He converts some of the priests 
into priestesses, following the conventional European practice of making 
Oriental women central to any exotic practice: the functional equivalents of 
his priestesses are the dancing girls, slaves, concubines, and bathing harem 
beauties prevalent in mid-nineteenth-century European art and, by the 
I87oS, entertainment. These displays of feminine eroticism a /'orientale "ar­
ticulated power relations and revealed a desire to enhance supremacy 
through representation." 103 Some of this is easy to spot in the scene in Act 
II set inside Amneris's chamber, in which sensuality and cruelty are inev­
itably associated (for example, in the dance of Moorish slaves). The other 
thing Verdi does is to convert the general Orientalist cliche of life at 
court into a more directly allusive barb against the male priesthood. 
Ramfis the High Priest is, I think, informed both by Verdi's Risorgimento 
anti-clericalism and by his ideas about the despotic Oriental potentate, a man 
who will exact vengeance out of sheer bloodthirst masked in legalism and 
scriptural precedent. 
As for the modally exotic music, we know from his letters that Verdi 
consulted the work of Francois-Joseph Fetis, a Belgian musicologist who 
seems to have irritated and fascinated him in equal measure. Fetis was the 
first European to attempt a study of non-European music as a separate part 
' of the general history of music, in his Reiume philoiophique de l'hiitoire de Ia 
mUiique (1835). His unfinished Hiitoire generate de Ia mUiique depuii lei tempi 122. CONSOLI-DATED VISION 
anciens a nos jours (r869-76) carried the project further, emphasizing the 
unique particularity of exotic music and its integral identity. Fetis seems to 
have known E. W. Lane's work on nineteenth-century Egypt, as well as the 
two volumes on Egyptian music in the De;-cription. 
Feris's value for Verdi was that he could read examples in his work of 
"Oriental" music-the harmonic cliches, much used in carnival hoochy­
kooch, are based on a flattening of the hypertonic-and instal)ces of Oriental 
instruments, which in some cases corresponded to representation in the 
De.rcription: harps, flutes, and the by now well-known ceremonial trumpet, 
which Verdi went to somewhat comic effort to have built in Italy. 
Lasdy, Verdi and Mariette collaborated imaginatively-and in my opin­
ion, most successfully-in creating the quite wonderful atmospherics of Act 
III, the so-called Nile scene. Here too an idealized representation in the 
Napoleonic Descnption was the probable model for Mariette's image of the 
scene, whereas Verdi heightened his conception of an antique Orient by 
using Jess literal and more suggestive musical means. The result is a superb 
tonal picture with a permeable outline that sustains the quiet scene-painting 
of the act's opening, and then opens out to the turbulent and conflicted 
climax among Aida, her father, and Radames. Mariette's sketch for the 
setting of this magnificent scene is like a synthesis of his Egypt: "The set 
represents a garden of the palace. At the left, the oblique facade of a 
pavilion-or tent. At the back of the stage.flows the Nile. On the horizon the 
mountains of the Libyan chain, vividly illuminated by the setting sun. 
Statues, palms, tropical shrubs." 104 No wonder that, like Verdi, he saw 
himself as ·a creator. "Aida," he said in a letter to the patient and ever­
resourceful Draneht Guly 19, 1871), "is in effect a product of my work. I am 
the one who convinced the Viceroy to order its presentation; Aida in a word, 
is a creation of my brain."' 05 
Aida thus incorporates and fuses material about Egypt in a form that both 
Verdi and Mariette could claim with justification to be of their making. Yet 
I suggest that the work suffers--or is at least peculiar-because of the 
selectivity of and emphases in what is included and, by implication, ex­
cluded. Verdi must have had opportunities to wonder what modern Egyp­
tians thought of his work, how individual listeners responded to his music, 
what would become of the opera after the premiere. But little of this has 
found its way into the record, except a few ill-tempered letters rebuking 
European critics at the premiere; they gave him unwelcome publicity, he said 
rather churlishly. In a letter to Filippi we already begin to get a sense of 
Verdi's distance from the opera, a Verfremdungsiffrltt, I believe, already writ­
ten into Aida's scene and libretto: The Empire at Work: Verdi'.r Aida 123 
... You in Cairo? This is the most powerful publicity for Aida one could 
imagine! It seems to me that in this way an is no longer an but a business, 
a game of pleasure, a hunt, something to be chased after, something which 
must be given if not success, at least notoriety at any cost! My reaction to 
this is one of disgust and humiliation! I always remember with joy my 
early days when, with almost no friends, without anyone to talk about me, 
without preparations, without influence of any kind, I went before the 
public with my operas, ready to be blasted and quite happy if I could 
succeed in stirring up some favorable impression. Now, what pomposity 
for an opera!!!!Joumalists, anists, ch~risters, conductors, instrumentalists, 
etc., etc. All of them must carry their stone to the edi6ce of publicity and 
thus fashion a framework oflittle trifles that add nothing to the wonh of 
an opera; in fact they obscure the real value (if there is any). This is 
deplorable, profoundly deplorable!!!! 
I thank you for your courteous offers for Cairo, but I wrote to 
Bottesini the day before yesterday everything concerning Aida. For this 
opera I want only a good and above all, an intelligent vocal and instru­
mental performance and mise-en-scene. As for the rest, a Ia grace de 
Dieu; for so I began and so I wish to 6nish my ca~eer ... 106 
The protestations here extend his attitudes about the opera's single inten­
tion: Aida is a self-sufficient work of an, he seems to be saying, and let's leave 
it at that. But isn't there something else going on here too, some sense on 
Verdi's part of an opera written for a place he cannot relate to, with a plot 
that ends in hopeless deadlock and literal entombment? 
Verdi's awareness of Aidrls incongruities appears elsewhere. At one point 
he speaks ironically of adding Palestrina to the harmony of Egyptian music, 
and he seems also to have been conscious of the extent to which ancient 
Egypt was not only a dead civilization but also a culture of death, whose 
apparent ideology of conquest (as he adapted it from Herodotus and Ma­
riette) was related to an ideology of the afterlife. The rather somber, disen­
chanted, and vestigial attachment that Verdi had to the politics of the 
Risorgimento as he worked on Aida appears in the work as military success 
entailing personal failure or, as it can also be described, as political triumph 
rendered in the ambivalent tones of human impasse, in short, of Realpolitik. 
Verdi seems to have imagined the positive attributes of Radames's patria as 
ending up in the funereal tones of terra addio, and certainly the divided stage 
in Act IV-a possible source is one of the plates in the Description--power­
fully impressed on his mind the discordia concor1 of Amneris's unrequited 
passion and Aida's and Radames's blissful deaths. I24 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
Aida's airlessness and immobility are relieved only by ballets and trium­
phal parades, but even these displays are undermined in some way: Verdi 
was too intelligent and single-minded to have left them untouched. The 
dance of Ramfis's triumphant consecration in Act I of course leads to 
Radames's demise in Acts III and IV, so there is little to be pleased about; 
the dance of the Moorish slaves in Act II, scene I, is a dance of slaves, who 
entertain Amneris as she malevolently plays with Aida, her slave rival. As 
for the really famous part of Act II, scene 1, here we have perhaps the core 
of Aida's egregious appeal to audiences and directors alike, who take it as an 
opportunity to do more or less anything so long as it is excessive and full 
of display. This in fact may not be far from Verdi's intention. 
Take as three modern examples the following: One--
Aida in Cincinnati (March I986). A press release from the Cincinnati 
Opera announces that for its performance of Aida this season the fol­
lowing animals would take part in the Triumph scene: 1 aardvark, 
1 donkey, 1 elephant, 1 boa constrictor, 1 peacock, 1 toucan, 1 red-tail 
hawk, I white tiger, 1 Siberian lynx, I cockatoo, and I cheetah-total 
n; and that the body count for the production will total 161, being 
made up of 8 principals, I17 chorus (40 regular chorus, 77 extras), 24 
ballet, 101 supernumeraries (including 12 zoo keepers), and n animals. 107 
This is Aida as a more or less untreated, partly comic outpouring of opu­
lence, a feat played and replayed with matchless vulgarity at the Baths of 
Caracalla. 
In contrast there is Wieland Wagner's Act II, scene 2, a parade of Ethi­
opian prisoners carrying totems, masks, ritual objects as elements of an 
ethnographic exhibition presented to the audience. This "was the transfer­
ence of the whole setting of the work from the Egypt of the Pharaohs to the 
darker Africa of a prehistoric age": 
What I was trying to do, in regard to the scenery, was to give Aida the 
colourful fragrance that is in it--deriving it not from an Egyptian 
museum, but from the atmosphere inherent in the work itself. I wanted 
to get away from false Egyptian artiness and false operatic monumen­
tality, from Hollywoodish historical painting, and return to archaic­
which is to say, in terms of Egyptology-to pre-dynastic times.108 
Wagner's emphasis is on the difference between "our" world and "theirs," 
surely something that Verdi emphasized too, with his recognition that the 
opera was first composed and designed for a place that was decidedly 1t(}f The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida 12J 
Paris, Milan, or Vienna. And this recognition, interestingly enough, brings 
us to Aida in Mexico I9J2., where the leading singer, Maria Callas, outper­
forms the whole ensemble by ending up on a high E-flat, one octave above 
the note written by Verdi. 
In all three examples the effort is made to exploit this one opening that 
Verdi allowed in the work, an aperture through which he seems to be letting 
in an outside world otherwise banned from entry. His terms, though, are 
astringent. He seems to be saying, Come in as exotica or as captives, stay 
awhile, and then leave me to my business. And to shore up his territory, he 
resorts musically to devices he hardly ever used before, all of them designed 
to signal to the audience that a musical master, steeped in the learned 
traditional techniques scorned by his bel canto contemporaries, was at work. 
On February 2.0, 1871, he wrote a correspondent, Giuseppe Piroli, that "for 
the young composer, then, I would want very long and rigorous exercises in 
all branches of counterpoint. ... No struly of the moderns/" 109 This was in 
keeping with the mortuary aspects of the opera he was writing (making the 
mummies sing, he once said), which opens with a piece of strict canon 
writing; Verdi's contrapuntal and stretto techniques in Aida reach a height­
ened intensity and rigor of an order he rarely achieved. Along with the 
martial music dotting Aida's score (some of which was later to become the 
Khedival Egyptian national anthem), these learned passages strengthen the 
opera's monumentality and-more to the point-its wall-like struCture. 
In short, Aida quite precisely recalls the enabling circumstances of its 
commission and composition, and, like an echo to an original sound, con­
forms to aspects of the contemporary context it works so hard to exclude. 
As a highly specialized form of aesthetic memory, Aida embodies, as it was 
intended to do, the authority of Europe's version of Egypt at a moment in 
its nineteenth-century history, a history for which Cairo in the years I869""" 
I87I was an extraordinarily suitable site. A full contrapuntal appreciation of 
Aida reveals a structure of reference and attitude, a web of affiliations, 
connections, decisions, and collaborations, which can be read as leaving a set 
of ghostly notations in the opera's visual and musical text. 
Consider the story: an Egyptian army defeats an Ethiopian force, but the 
young Egyptian hero of the campaign is impugned as a traitor, sentenced to 
death, and dies by asphyxiation. This episode of antiquarian inter-African 
rivalry acquires considerable resonance when one reads it against the back­
ground of Anglo-Egyptian rivalry in East Africa from the 184os till the 186os. 
The British regarded Egyptian objectives there under Khedive Ismai~ who 
was eager to expand southward, as a threat to their Red Sea hegemony, and 
the safety of their route to India; nevertheless, prudently shifting policy, the 
British encouraged Ismail's moves in East Africa as a way of blocking French I2.6 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
and Italian ambitiQns in Somalia and Ethiopia. By the early 187os the change 
was completed, and by 1882. Britain occupied Egypt entirely. From the 
French point of view, incorporated by Mariette, Aida dramatized the dangers 
of a successful Egyptian policy of force in Ethiopia, especially since Ismail 
himself-as Ottoman Viceroy-was interested in such ventures as a way of 
achieving more independence from Istanbul. 110 
There is more than that in Aida's simplicity and severity, especially since 
so much about the opera, and the Opera House, which was built to house 
Verdi's work, concerns Ismail himself and his reign (r86t-1879). A fair amount 
of work has been done recently on the economic and political history of 
European involvement in Egypt during the eighty years after Napoleon's 
expedition; much of this concurs with the position taken by Egyptian nation­
alist historians (Sabry; Rafi', Ghorbal) that the viceregal heirs who composed 
Mohammad Ali's dynasty, in a descending order of merit (with the excep­
tion of the intransigent Abbas), involved Egypt ever more deeply in what has 
been called the "world economy" 111 but more accurately was the loose 
agglomeration of European financiers, merchant bankers, loan corporations, 
and commercial adventures. This led ineluctably to the British occupation 
of 1882., and, just as ineluctably, to the eventual reclamation of the Suez Canal 
by Gamal Abdel Nasser in July 1956. 
By the 186os and 187os the most striking feature of the Egyptian economy 
was the boom in cotton sales that occurred when the American Civil War 
closed off American supply to European mills; this only accelerated the 
various distortions in the local economy (by the 187os, according to Owen, 
"the entire Delta had been converted into an export sector devoted to the 
production, processing and export of two or three crops," 112) which were 
part of a much larger, more depressing situation. Egypt was1 opened to 
schemes of every sort, some crazy, some beneficial (like the constructions of 
railroads and roads), all costly, especially the canal. Development was fi­
nanced by issuing treasury bonds, printing money, increasing the budgetary 
deficit; the growth of the public debt added a good deal to Egypt's foreign 
debt, the cost of servicing it, and the further penetration of the country by 
foreign investors and their local agents. The general cost for foreign loans 
seems to have been somewhere between 30 and 40 percent of their face 
value. (David Landes's Bankers and Pashas gives a detailed history of the 
whole sordid yet amusing episode.) 113 
In addition to its deepening economic weakness and dependency on 
European finance, Egypt under Ismail underwent an important series of 
antitheti_cal developments. At the same time that the population grew natu­
rally, the size of foreign resident communities grew geometrically-to 
9o,ooo by the early r88os. The concentration of wealth in the viceregal family The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida 
and its retainers in tum established a pattern of virtual feudal landholding 
and urban privilege, which in turn hastened the development of a nationalist 
consciousness of resistance. Public opinion seems to have opposed Ismail as 
much because he was perceived to be handing Egypt over to foreigners as 
because those foreigners for their part appeared to take Egypt's quiescence 
and weakness for granted. It was noted angrily, says the Egyptian historian 
Sabry, that in Napoleon III's speech at the canal's opening, he mentioned 
France and its canal but never Egypt. 114 On the other side of the spectrum, 
Ismail was publicly attacked by pro-Ottoman journalists 115 for the folly of 
his exorbitantly expensive European trips (these are chronicled in almost 
sickening detail in Georges Douin, Histoire du regne du Khedive Ismail, vol. 
2),116 his pretence of independence from the Porte, his overtaxing of his 
subjects, his lavish invitations to European celebrities for the canal opening. 
The more Khedive Ismail wished to appear independent, the more his 
effrontery cost Egypt, the more the Ottomans resented his shows of indepen­
dence, and the more his European creditors resolved to keep a closer hand 
on him. Ismail's "ambition and imagination startled his listeners. In the hot, 
. straitened summer of 1864, he was thinking not only of canals and railroads, 
but of Paris-on-the-Nile an4 oflsmail, Emperor of Africa. Cairo would have 
its grands boulevards, Bourse, theatres, opera; Egypt would have a large army, 
a powerful1ieet. Why?. asked the French Consul. He might also have asked, 
How?" 117 
"How" was to proceed with the renovation of Cairo, which required the 
employment of many Europeans (among them Draneht) and the develop­
ment of a new class of city-dwellers whose tastes and requirements por­
tended the expansion of a local market geared to expensive imported goods. 
As Owen says, "where foreign imports were important ... was in catering 
to the completely different co~sumption pattern of a large foreign popula­
tion and those among the local Egyptian landowners and officials who had 
begun to live in European types of houses in the Europeanized section of 
, Cairo and Alexandria where almost everything of importance was purchased 
. from abroad--even building material." 118 And, we might add, operas, com­
posers, singers, conductors, sets, and costumes. An important added benefit 
to such projects was to convince foreign creditors with visible evidence that 
their money was· being put to good use;119 
Unlike Alexandria, however, Cairo was an Arab and Islamic city, even in 
Ismail's heyday. Aside from the romance of the Giza archeological sites, 
Cairo's past did not communicate easily or well with Europe; here were no 
Hellenistic or Levantine associations, no gentle sea breezes, no bustling 
Mediterranean port life. Cairo's massive centrality to Africa, to Islam, to the 
Arab and Ottoman worlds seemed like an intransigent barrier to European 12.8 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
investors, and the hope of making it more accessible and attractive to them 
surely prompted Ismail to support the city's modernization. This he did 
essentially by dividing Cairo. One can do no better than to quote from the 
best twentieth-century account of Cairo, Cairo: 1001 Years of the City Victorious, 
by the American urban historian Janet Abu-Lughod: 
Thus by the end of the nineteenth century Cairo consisted of two 
distinct physical communities, divided one from the other by barriers 
much broader than the little single street that marked their borders. 
The discontinuity between Egypt's past and future, which appeared as 
a small crack in the early nineteenth century, had widened into a 
gaping fissure by the end of that century. The city's physical duality 
was but a manifestation of the cultural cleavage. 
To the east lay the native city, still essentially pre-industrial in 
technology, social structure, and way of life; to the west lay the "colo" 
nial" city with its steam-powered techniques, its faster pace and 
wheeled traffic, and its European identification. To the east lay the 
labyrinth street pattern of yet unpaved harat and tlurub, although by 
then the gates had been dismantled and two new thoroughfares pierced 
the shade; to the west were broad straight streets of macadam flanked 
by wide walks and setbacks, militantly crossing one another at rigid 
right angles or converging here and there in a roundpoint or maytlan. 
The quarters of the eastern city were still dependent upon itinerant 
water peddlars, although residents in the western city had their water 
delivered through a convenient network of conduits connected with 
the steam pumping station near the river. Eastern quarters were 
plunged into darkness at nightfall, while gaslights illuminated the thor­
oughfares to the west. Neither parks nor street trees relieved the sand 
and mud tones of the medieval city; yet the city to the west was 
elaborately adorned with French formal gardens, strips of decorative 
flower beds, or artificially shaped trees. One entered the old city by 
caravan and traversed it on foot or animal-back; one entered the new 
by railroad and proceeded via horse-drawn victoria. In short, on all 
critical points the two cities, despite their physical contiguity, were 
miles apart socially and centuries apart technologically. 120 
The Opera House built by Ismail for Verdi sat right at the center of the 
north-south axis, in the middle of a spacious square, facing the European 
city, which stretched westward to the banks of the Nile. To the north were 
the railroad station, Shepheards Hotel, and the Azbakiyah Gardens for 
which, Abu-Lughod adds, "Ismail imported the French landscape architect The Empire at Woti: V erdi'r Aida 12.9 
whose work he admired in the Bois de Boulogne and Champs de Mars and 
commissioned him to redesign Azbakiyah as a Pare Monceau, complere with 
the free form pool, grotto, bridges, and belvederes which instituted the 
inevitable cliches of a nineteenth-century French garden." 121 To the south 
lay Abdin Palace, redesigned by Ismail as his principal residence in 1874. 
Behind the Opera House lay the teeming quarters ofMuski, Sayida Zeinab, 
'Ataba al-Khadra, held back by the Opera House's imposing size and Euro­
pean authority. 
Cairo was beginning to register the intellectual ferment of reform, some 
but by no means all of it under the jnfluence of the European penetration, 
and this resulted, as Jacques Berque puts it, in a confusion of production. m 
This is beautifully evoked in perhaps the finest account of Ismailian Cairo, 
the Kbittat Tawftkija of Ali Pasha Mobarak, the prodigiously energetic minis­
ter of public works and education, an engineer, nationalist, modernizer, 
tireless historian, village son of a humble foqih, a man as fascinated by the 
West as he was compelled by the traditions and religion of the Islamic East. 
One has the impression that Cairo's changes in this period forced Ali Pasha 
to record the city's life in recognition that the dynamics of Cairo now 
required a new, modem attention to detail, detail which stimulated unprece­
dented discriminations and observations on the pan of the native Cairene. 
Ali does not mention the Opera, although he speaks in detail of Ismail's 
lavish expenditure on his palaces, his gardens and roos, and his displays for 
visiting dignitaries. Later Egyptian writers will, like Ali, note the ferment of 
this period, but will also note (e.g., Anwar Abdel-Malek) the Opera House 
and Aida as antinomian symbols of the country's artistic life and its imperial­
ist subjugation. In 1971 the wooden Opera House burned down; it was never 
rebuilt there, and its site was occupied first by a parking lot, then by a 
multistoried garage. In 1988 a new cultural center was built on the Gezira 
Island with Japanese money; this center included an opera house. 
Clearly we should conclude that Cairo could not long sustain Aida as an 
opera written for an occasion and a place it seemed to outlive, even as it 
triumphed on Western stages for many decades. ,"Jida's Egyptian identity was 
part of the city's European facade, its simplicity and rigor inscribed on those 
imaginary walls dividing the colonial city's native from its imperial quarters. 
Aida is an aesthetic of separation, and we cannot see in Aida the congruence 
between it and Cairo that Keats saw in both the frieze on the Grecian urn 
and what corresponded with it, the town and citadel "emptied of this folk, 
this pious morn." Aida, for most of Egypt, was an imperial article de luxe 
purchased by credit for a tiny clientele whose entertainment was incidental 
to their real purposes. Verdi thought of it as monument to his art; Ismail and 
Mariette, for diverse purposes, lavished on it their surplus energy and qo CONSOLIDATED VISION 
restless will. Despite its shortcomings, Aida can be enjoyed and interpreted 
as a kind of curatorial art, whose rigor and unbending frame recall, with 
relentlessly mortuary logic, a precise historical moment and a specifically 
dated aesthetic form, an imperial spectacle designed to alienate and impress 
an almost exclusively European audience. 
Of course, this ·is very far from Aida's position in the cultural repertory 
today. And certainly it is true that many great aesthetic objects of empire are 
remembered and admired without the baggage of domination that they 
carried through the process from gestation to production. Yet the empire 
remains, in inflection and traces, to be read, seen, and heard. And by not 
taking account of the imperialist structures of attitude and reference they 
suggest, even in works like Aida, which seem unrelated to the struggle for 
territory and control, we reduce those works to caricatures, elaborate ones 
perhaps, but caricatures nonetheless. 
One must remember, too, that when one belongs to the more powerful 
side in the imperial and colonial encounter, it is quite possible to overlook, 
forget, or ignore the unpleasant aspects of what went on "out there." The 
cultural machinery--of spectacles like Aida, of the genuinely interesting 
books written by travellers, novelists, and scholars, of fascinating photo­
graphs and exotic paintings--has had an aesthetic as well as informative 
effect on European audiences. Things stay remarkably unchanged when 
such distancing and aestheticizing cultural practices are employed, for they 
split and then anesthetize the metropolitan consciousness. In 1865 the British 
Governor of)amaica, E.J. Eyre, ordered a retaliatory massacre of Blacks for 
the killing of a few whites; this revealed to many English people the injus­
tices and horrors of colonial life; the subsequent debate engaged famous 
public personalities both for Eyre's declaration of martial law and massacre 
of]amaican Blacks (Ruskin, Carlyle, Arnold) and againFt him (Mill, Huxley, 
Lord Chief Justice Cockburn). In rime, however, the case was forgotten, and 
other "administrative massacres" in the empire occurred. Yet, in the words 
of one historian, "Great Britain managed to maintain the distinction be­
rween domestic liberty and imperial authority [which he describes as "re­
pression and terror"] abroad."m 
Most modern readers of Matthew Arnold's anguished poetry, or of his 
celebrated theory in praise of culture, do not also know that Arnold con­
nected the "administrative massacre" ordered by Eyre with tough British 
policies toward colonial Eire and strongly approved both; Culture and Anarchy 
is set plumb in the middle of the Hyde Park Riots of 1867, and what Arnold 
had to say about culture was specifically believed to be a deterrent to 
rampant disorder--colonial, Irish, domestic. Jamaicans, Irishmen, and 
women, and some historians bring up these massacres at "inappropriate" The Empire at Work: Verdi's Aida 
moments, but most Anglo-American readers· of Arnold remain oblivious, see 
them-if they look at them at all-as irrelevant to the more imponant 
culrural theory that Arnold appears to be promoting for all the ages. 
(As a small parenthesis, it is imponant to note that whatever its legal basis 
against Saddam Hussein's brutal occupation of Kuwait, Operation Desert 
Storm was also partly launched so as to lay the ghost of the "Vietnam 
syndrome," to assert that the United States could win a war, and win it 
quickly. To sustain this motive, one had to forget that two million Viet­
namese were killed, and that sixteen years after rhe end of the war Southeast 
Asia is still devastated. Therefore m~king America strong and enhancing 
President Bush's image as a leader took precedence over destroying a distant 
society. And high technology and clever public relations were used to make 
the war seem exciting, clean, and virtuous. As Iraq underwent paroxysms of 
disintegration, counter-rebellion, and mass human suffering, American pop­
ular interest briefly cheered.) 
For the European of the late nineteenth cenrury, an interesting range of 
options are offered, all premised upon the subordination and victimization 
of the native. One is a self-forgetting delight in the use of power-the power 
to observe, rule, hold, and profit from distant territories and people. From 
these come voyages of discovery, lucrative trade, administration, annexa­
tion, learned expeditions and exhibitions, local spectacles, a new class of 
colonial rulers and experts. Another is an ideological rationale for reducing; 
then reconstitUting the native as someone to be ruled and managed. There 
are styles of rule, as Thomas Hodgkin characterizes them in his Nationatinn 
in Colonial Africa-French Cartesianism, British empiricism, Belgian Plato­
nism.m And one finds them inscribed within the humanistic enterprise itself: 
the various colonial schools, colleges, and universities, the native elites 
created and manipulated throughout Africa and Asia. Third is the idea of 
. Western salvation and redemption through its "civilizing mission." Sup~ 
poned jointly by the experts in ideas (missionaries, teachers, advisers, schol­
ars) and in modern industry and communication, the imperial idea of 
westernizing the backward achieved permanent status world-wide, but, as 
Michael Adas and oi:hers have shown, it was always accompanied by domi­
nation.m Fourth is the security of a situation that permits the conqueror not 
to look into the truth of the violence he does. The idea of culture itself, as 
Arnold refined it, is designed to elevate practice to the level of theory, to 
liberate ideological cot;rcion against rebellious elements--at home and 
abroad-from the mundane and historical to the abstract and general. "The 
best that is thought and done" is considered an unassailable position, at 
home and abroad. Fifth is the process by which, after the natives have been 
displaced from their historical location on their land, their history is rewrit-CONSOLIDATED VISION 
ten as a function of the imperial one. This process uses narrative to dispel 
contradictory memories and occlude violence-the exotic replaces the im­
press of power with the blandishments of curiosity-with the imperial 
presence so dominating as to make impossible any effort to separate it from 
historical necessity. All these together create an amalgam of the arts of 
narrative and observation about the accumulated, dominated, and ruled 
territories whose inhabitants seem destined never to escape, to remain 
creatures of European will. 
( v ) 
The Plea.rures of Imperialism 
Vim is as unique in Rudyard Kipling's life and career as it is in English 
1\. literature. It appeared in 1901, twelve years after Kipling had left India, 
the place of his birth and the country with which his name will always be 
associated. More interestingly, Kim was Kipling's only successfully sustained 
and mature piece oflong fiction; although it can be read with enjoyment by 
adolescents, it can also be read with respect and interest years after adoles­
cence, by the general reader and the ·critic alike. Kipling's other fiction 
consists either of short stories (or collections thereof, such as Tbe Jungle 
Books), or deeply flawed longer works (like Captain.r Courageou.r, The Light 
That Failed, and Stalky and Co., whose other interest is often overshadowed 
by failures of coherence, vision, or judgement). Only Conrad, another master 
stylist, can be considered along with Kipling, his slightly younger peer, to 
have rendered the experience of empire as the main subject of his work with 
such force; and even though the two artists are remarkably different in tone 
and style, they brought to a basically insular and provincial British audience 
the color, glamor, and romance of the British overseas enterprise, which was 
well-known to specialized sectors of the home society. Of the two, it is 
Kipling-less ironic, technically self-conscious, and equivocal than Con­
rad-who acquired a large audience early on. But both writers have re­
mained a puzzle for scholars of English literature, who find them eccentric, 
often troubling, better treated with circumspection. or even avoidance than 
absorbed into the canon and domesticated along with peers like Dickens and 
Hardy. 
Conrad's major visions of imperialism concern Africa in Heart of Darlmerr 
(1899), the South Seas in Lord Jim (19oo), and South America in Nortromo The Pleasures of Imperialism 
(19o4), but Kipling's greatest work concentrates on India, a territory Conrad 
never wrote about. And by the late nineteenth century India had become the 
greatest, most durable, and most profitable of all British, perhaps even 
European, colonial possessions. From the time the first British expedition 
arrived there in 16o8 until the last British Viceroy departed in 1947, India had 
a massive influence on British life, in commerce and trade, industry and 
politics, ideology and war, culture and the life of imagination. In English 
literature and thought the list of great names who dealt with and wrote about 
India is astonishingly impressive, for it includes William Jones, Edmund 
Burke, William Makepeace Thackeray, Jeremy Bentham, James and John 
Stuart Mill, Lord Macaulay, Harriet Martineau, and, of course Rudyard 
Kipling, whose importance in the definition, the imagination, the formula­
tion of what India was to the British empire in its mature phase, just before 
the whole edifice began to split and crack, is undeniable. 
Kipling not only wrote about India, but was ofit His father, Lockwood, 
a refined scholar, teacher, and artist (the model for the kindly curator of the 
Lahore Museum in Chapter One of Kim), was a teacher in British India. 
Rudyard was born there in 1865, and during the first years of his life he spoke 
Hindustani and lived a life very much like Kim's, a Sahib in native clothes. 
At the age of six he and his sister were sent to England to begin school; 
appallingly traumatic, the experience of his first years in England (in the 
care of a Mrs. Holloway at Southsea) furnished Kipling with an enduring 
subject matter, the interaction between youth and unpleasant authority, 
which he rendered with great complexity and ambivalence throughout his 
life. Then Kipling went to one of the lesser public schools designed for 
children of the colonial service, the United Services College at Westward 
Ho! (the greatest of the schools was Haileybury, reserved for the upper 
echelons of the colonial elite); he returned to India in 1882. His family was 
still there, and so for seven years, as he tells of those events in his posthu­
mously published autobiography Something of Myself, he worked as a journal­
ist in the Punjab, first on The Civil and Military Gazette, later on The Pioneer. 
His first stories came out of that experience, and were published locally; 
at that time he also began writing his poetry (what T. S. Eliot has called 
"verse"), first collected in Departmental Ditties (1886). Kipling left India in 1889, 
never again to reside there for any length of time, although for the rest of 
his life his art fed on the memories of his early Indian years. Subsequently, 
Kipling stayed for a while in the United States (and married an American 
woman) and South Africa, but settled in England after 19oo: Kim was written 
at Bateman, the house he remained in rill his death in 1936. He quickly won 
great fame and a large readership; in 1907 he was awarded the Nobel Prize. 
His friends were rich and powerful; they included his cousin Stanley Bald-CONSOLIDATED VISION 
win, King George V, Thomas Hardy; many prominent writers including 
Henry James and Conrad spoke respectfully of him. After World War One 
(in which his son John was killed) his vision darkened considerably. Al­
though he remained a Tory i'mperialist, his bleak visionary stories of En­
gland and the future, together with his eccentric animal and 
quasi-theological stories, forecast also a change in his reputation: At his 
death, he was accorded the honor reserved by Britain for its greatest writers: 
he was buried in Westminster Abbey. He has remained an institution in 
English letters, albeit one always slightly apart from the great central strand, 
acknowledged but slighted, appreciated but never fully canonized. 
\ Kipling's admirers and acolytes have often spoken of his representations 
of India as if the India he wrote about was a timeless, unchanging, and 
"essential" locale, a place almost as much poetic as it is actual in geographi­
cal concreteness. This, I think, is a radical misreading of his works. If 
Kipling's India has essential and unchanging qualities, this was because he 
deliberately saw India that way. After all, we do not assume that Kipling's 
late stories about England or his Boer War tales are about an essential 
England or an essential South Africa; rather, we surmise correctly that 
Kipling was responding tQ and in effect imaginatively reformulating his 
sense of these places at particular moments in their histories. The same is 
rrue of Kipling's India, which must be interpreted as a territory dominated 
by Britain for three hundred years, and only then beginning to experience 
the unrest that would culminate in decolonization and independence. 
Two factors must be kept in mind as we interpret Kim. One is that, 
whether we like it or not, its author is writing not just from the dominating 
· viewpoint of a white man in a colonial possession, but from the perspective 
of a massive colonial system whose economy, functioning, and history had 
acquired the status of a virtual fact of nature. Kipling assumes a basically 
uncontested empire. On one side of the colonial divide was a white Christian 
Europe whose various countries, principally Britain and France, but also 
Holland, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Russia, Portugal, and Spain, controlled 
most of the earth's surface. On the other side of the divide, there were an 
immense variety of territories and races, all of them considered lesser, 
inferior, dependent, subject. ''White" colonies like Ireland and Australia too 
were considered made up of inferior humans; a famous Daumier drawing, 
for instance, explicitly connects Irish whites and Jamaican Blacks. Each of 
these lesser subjects was classified and placed in a scheme of peoples guaran­
teed scientifically by scholars and scientists like Georges Cuvier, Charles 
Darwin, and Robert-Knox. The division between white and non-white, in 
India and elsewhere, was absolute, and is alluded to throughout Kim as well The Pleasures of Imperialism 135 
as the rest of Kipling's work; a Sahib is a Sahib, and no amount offriendship 
or camaraderie can change the rudiments of racial difference. Kipling would 
no more have questioned that difference, and the right of the white Euro­
pean to rule, than he would have argued with the Himalayas. 
The second factor is that, no less than India itself, Kipling was a historical 
being as well as a major artist. Kim was written at a specific moment in his 
career, at a time when the relationship between the British and Indian 
people was changing. Kim is central tO the quasi-official age of empire and 
in a way represents it. And even though Kipling resisted this reality, India 
was already well on its way tOW!lrd a dynamic of outright opposition to 
British rule (the Indian National Congress was established in r88J), while 
among the dominant caste of British colonial officials, military as· well as 
civilian, imponant changes in attitude were occurring as a result of the r857 
Rebellion. The British and Indians were both evolving, and together. They 
had a common interdependent history, in which opposition, animosity, and 
sympathy either kept them apart or brought them together. A remarkable, 
complex novel like Kim is a very illuminating pan of that .history, filled with 
emphases, inflections, deliberate inclusions and exclusions as any great work 
of an is, and made the more interesting because Kipling was not a ·neutral 
figure in the Anglo-Indian situation but a prominent actor in it. 
Even though India gained its independence (and was partitioned) in i947, 
the question ofhow to interpret Indian and British history in the period after 
decolonization is still, like all such dense and highly conflicted encounters, 
a matter ·of strenuous, if not always edifying, debate. There is the view, for 
example, that imperialism permanently scarred and distoned Indian life, so 
that even after decades of independence, the Indian economy, bled by 
British needs and practices, continues to suffer. Conversely, there are British 
intellectuals, political figures, and historians who believe that giving up the 
empire--whose symbols were Suez, Aden, and Indi~was bad for Britain 
and bad for "the natives," who both have declined in all sons of ways ever 
since.126 
When we read it today, Kipling's Kim can touch on many of these issues. 
Does Kipling pornay the Indians as inferior, or as somehow equal but 
different? Obviously, an Indian reader will give an answer that focusses on 
some factors more than others (for example, Kipling's stereotypical views­
some would call them racialist-1Jn the Oriental character), whereas English 
and American readers will stress his affection .for Indian life on the Grand 
Trunk Road. How then do we read Kim as a late-nineteenth.:century novel, 
preceded by the works of Scott, Austen, Dickens, and Eliot? We must not 
forget that the book is after all a novel in a line of novels, that there is more CONSOLIDATED VISION 
than one history in it to be remembered, that the imperial experience while 
often regarded as exclusively political also entered into the cultural and 
aesthetic life of the metropolitan west as well. 
A brief summary of the novel's plot may be rehearsed here. Kimball 
O'Hara is the orphaned son of a sergeant in the Indian army; his mother is 
also white. He has grown up as a child of the Lahm:e bazaars, carrying with 
him an amulet and some papers attesting to his origins. He meets up with 
a saintly Tibetan monk who is in search of the River where he supposes he 
will be cleansed of his sins. Kim becomes his chela, or disciple, and the two 
wander as adventurous mendicants through India, using some help from the 
English curator of the Lahore Museum. In the meantime Kim becomes 
involved in a British Secret Service plan to defeat a Russian-inspired con­
spiracy whose aim is to stir up insurrection in one of the northern Punjabi 
provinces. Kim is used as a messenger berween Mahbub AI~ an Afghan horse 
dealer who works for the British, and Colonel Creighton, head of the 
Service, a scholarly enthnographer. Later Kim meets with the other mem­
bers of Creighton's team in the Great Game, Lurgan Sahib and Hurree 
Babu, also an ethnographer. By the time that Kim meets Creighton, it is 
discovered that the l>oy is white (albeit Irish) and not a native, as he appears, 
and he is sent to school at St. Xavier's, where his education as a white boy 
is to be completed. The guru manages to get the money for Kim's tuition, 
and during the holidays the old man and his young disciple resume their 
peregrinations. Kim and the old man meet the Russian spies, from whom the 
boy somehow steals incriminating papers, but not before the "fOreigners" 
strike the holy man. Although the plot has been found out and ended, both 
the chela and his mentor are disconsolate and ill. They are healed by Kim's 
restorative powers and a renewed contact with the earth; the old man 
understands that through Kim he has found the River. As the novel ends 
Kim returns to the Great Game, and in effect enters the British colonial 
service full-time. 
Some. features of Kim will strike every reader, regardless of politics and 
history. It is an overwhelmingly male novel, with two wonderfully attractive 
men at its center-a boy who grows into early manhood, and an old ascetic 
priest. Grouped around them are other men, some of them companions, 
others colleagues and friends; these make up the novel's major, defining 
reality. Mahbub Ali, Lurgan Sahib, the great Babu, as well as the old Indian 
soldier and his dashing horse-riding son, plus Colonel Creighton, Mr. Ben­
nett, and Father Victor, to name only a few of the numerous cha.racters in 
this teeming book: all of them speak the language that men speak among 
themselves. The women in the novel are remarkably few by comparison, and 
all of them are somehow debased or unsuitable for male attention-prosti-Tbe Plea.rures of Imperialism 137 
tutes, elderly widows, or importunate and lusty women like the widow of 
Shamlegh; to be "eternally pestered by women," says Kim, is to be hindered 
in 'playing the Great Game, which is best played by men alone. We are in 
a masculine world dominated by travel, trade, adventure, and intrigue, and 
it is a celibate world, in which the common romance of 1iction and the 
enduring institution of marriage are circumvented, avoided, all but ignored. 
At best, women help things along: they buy you a ticket, they cook, they tend 
the ill, and ... they molest men. 
Kim himself, although he ages in the novel from thineen until he is 
sixteen or seventeen, remains a b_oy, with a boy's passion for tricks, pranks, 
clever wordplay, resourcefulness. Kipling seems to have retained a life-long 
sympathy with himself as a boy beset by the adult world of domineering 
schoolmasters and priests (Mr. Bennett in Kim is an exceptionally unattrac­
tive specimen) whose authority must be always reckoned with-until an­
other figure of authority, like Colonel Creighton, comes along and treats· the 
young person with understanding, but no less authoritarian, compassion. 
The difference betWeen St. Xavier's School, which Kim attends for a time, 
and service in the Great Game (British intelligence in India) does not lie in 
the greater freedom of the latter; quite the contrary, the demands of the 
Great Game are more exacting. The difference lies in the fact that the 
former imposes a useless authority, whereas the exigencies of the Secret 
Service demand from Kim an exciting and precise discipline, which he 
willingly accepts. From Creighton's point of view the Great Game is a sort 
of political economy of control, in which, as he once tells Kim, the greatest 
sin is ignorance, not to know. But for Kim the Great Game cannot be 
perceived in all its complex patterns, although it can be fully enjoyed as a 
son of extended prank. The scenes where Kim banters, bargains, repartees 
with his elders, friendly and hostile alike, are indications of Kipling's seem­
ingly inexhaustible fund of boyish enjoyment in the sheer momentary plea­
sure of playing a game, any sort of game. 
We should not be mistaken about these boyish pleasures. They do not 
contradict the overall political purpose of British control over India and 
Britain's other overseas dominions: on the contrary, pleasure, whose steady 
presence in many forms ofimperial-<;olonial writing as well as figurative and 
musical art is often left undiscussed, is an undeniable component of Kim. A 
different example of this mixture of fun and single-minded political serious­
ness is to be found in Lord Baden-Powell's conception of the Boy Scouts, 
founded and launched i~-1907-8. An almost exact contemporary of Kipling, 
BP, as he was called, was greatly influenced by Kipling's boys generally and 
Mowgli in particular; BP's ideas about "boyology" fed those images directly 
into a grand scheme of imperial authority culminating in the great Boy CONSOLIDATED VISION 
Scout structUre "fortifying the wall of empire," which confirmed this inven­
tive conjunction of fun and service in row after row of bright-eyed, eager, 
and resourceful little middle-class servants of empire. 127 Kim, after all, is 
both Irish and of an inferior social caste; in Kipling's eyes this enhances his 
candidacy for service. BP and Kipling concur on two other important points: 
that boys ultimately should conceive· of life and empire as governed by 
unbreakable Laws, and that service is more enjoyable when thought of 
less like a story-linear, continuous, temporal-and more like a playing 
field-many-dimensional, discontinuous, spatial. A recent book by the 
historian J. A. Mangan sums it up nicely in its title: The Games Ethic and 
Imperia/i'sm. 128 
So large is his perspective and so strangely sensitive is Kipling to the 
range of human possibilities that he offsets this service ethic in Kim by giving 
full rein to another of his emotional predilections, expressed by the strange 
Tibetan lama and his relationship to the title character. Even though Kim 
is to be drafted into intelligence work, the gifted boy has already been 
charmed into becoming the lama's chela at the very outset of the novel. This 
almost idyllic relationship between two male companions has an interesting 
genealogy. Like a number of American novels (Huckleberry Finn, Moby-Dick, 
and The Deerslayer come quickly to mind), Kim celebrates the friendship of 
two men in a difficult, sometimes hostile environment. The American fron­
tier and colonial India are quite different, but both bestow a higher priority 
on "male bonding" than on a domestic or amorous connection between the 
sexes. Some critics have speculated on a hidden homosexual motif in these 
relationships, but there is also the cultural motif long associated with pica­
resque tales in which a male adventurer (with wife or mother, if either exists, 
safely at home) and his male companions are engaged in the pursuit of a 
special dream-like Jason, Odysseus, or, even more compellingly, Don 
Qy.ixote with Sancho Panza. In the field or on the open road, two men can 
travel together more easily, and they can come to each other's rescue more 
credibly than if a woman were along. So the long tradition of adventure 
stories, from Odysseus and his crew to the Lone Ranger and Tonto, Holmes 
and Watson, Batman and Robin, seems to hold. 
Kim's saintly guru additionally belongs to the overtly religious mode of 
the pilgrimage or quest, common in all cultures. Kipling, we know, was an 
admirer of Chaucer's Canterbury Tales and Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progrm. Kim is 
a good deal more like Chaucer's than like Bunyan's work. Kipling has the 
Middle EngliSh poet's eye for wayward detail, the odd character, the slice 
of life, the amused sense of human foibles and joys. Unlike either Chaucer 
or Bunyan, however, Kipling is less interested in religion for its own sake The Pleasures of Imperialism '39 
(although we never doubt the Abbot-Lama's piety) than in local color, 
scrupulous attention to exotic detail, and the all-enclosing realities of the 
G~at Game. It is the greatness of his achievement that quite without selling 
.the old man short or in any way diminishing the quaint sincerity of his 
Search, Kipling nevertheless firmly places him within the protective orbit of 
British rule in India This is symbolized in Chapter 1, when the elderly 
British museum curator gives the Abbot his spectacles, thus adding to the 
man's spiritual prestige and authority; consolidating the justness and legiti­
macy of Britain's benevolent sway. 
This view, in my opinion, has been misunderstood arid even denied by 
many of Kipling's readers. But we must not forget that the lama depends on 
Kim for support and guidance, and that Kim's achievement is neither. to have 
betrayed the lama's values nor to have let up in his work as junior. spy. 
Throughout the novel Kipling is clear to show us that the lama, while a wise 
and good man, needs Kim's youth, his guidance, his wits; the lama even 
explicitly acknowledges his 'absolute, religious need for Kim when, in 
Benares,· toward the end of Chapter 9, he tells the '1ataka," the parable of 
the young elephant ("The Lord Himself") freeing the old elephant 
(Ananda) imprisoned in a leg-iron. Clearly, the Abbot-Lama regards Kim as 
his savior. Later, after the fateful confrontation with the Russian agents who 
stir up insurrection against Britain, Kim helps (and is helped by) the lama, 
who in one of the most moving scenes in all Kipling's fiction says, "Child, 
I have lived on thy strength as an old tree lives on the lime of an old wall." 
Yet Kim, reciprocally moved by love for his guru, never. abandons his duty 
in the Great Game, although he confesses to the old man that he needs him 
"for some other things." 
Doubtless those "other things" are faith and unbending purpose. In one 
of its main narrative strands, Kim keeps returning to the quest, the lama's 
search for redemption from the Wheel of Life, a complex di~gtam of which 
he carries around in his pocket, and Kim's search for a secure place in 
colonial serVice. Kipling condescends to neither. He follows the lama wher­
ever·he goes in his wish to be freed from "the delusions of the Body," and 
it is surely part of our engagement i~ the novel's Oriental dimension, which 
Kipling renders with little false exoticism, that we can believe in the novel­
ist's respect for this pilgrim. Indeed, the lama commands attention and 
esteem from nearly everyone. He honors his word to get the money for 
Kim's education; he meets Kim at the appointed times and places; he is 
listened to with veneration and devotion. In an especially nice touch in 
Chapter 14. Kipling has him tell "a fantastic piled narrative of bewitchment 
and miracles" about marvelous events in his native Tibetan mountains, CONSOLIDATED VISION 
events that the novelist courteously forbears from repeating, as if to say that 
this old saint has a life of his own that cannot be reproduced in sequential 
English prose. 
The lama's search and Kim's illness at the end of the novel are resolved 
together. Readers of many of Kipling's other tales will be familiar with what 
the critic).M.S. Tompkins has rightly called "the theme ofhealing." 129 Here 
too the narrative progresses inexorably toward a great crisis. In an unforget­
table scene Kim attacks the lama's foreign and defiling assailants, the old 
man's talisman-like chart is rent, and the rwo forlorn pilgrims consequently 
wander through the hills bereft of calm and health. Kim waits to be relieved 
of his charge, the packet of papers he has stolen from the foreign spy; the 
lama is unbearably aware of how much longer he must now wait before he 
can achieve his spiritual goals. Into this heartrending situation, Kipling 
introduces one of the novel's two great fallen women (the other being the 
old widow of Kulu), the woman of Shamlegh, abandoned long ago by her 
"Kerlistian" Sahib, but strong, vital, and passionate nevertheless. (There is 
a memory here of one of Kipling's most affecting earlier short stories, 
"Lispeth," which treats the predicament of the native womim loved, but 
never married, by a departed white man.) The merest hint of a sexual charge 
between Kim and the lusry Shamlegh woman appears but is quickly dis­
sipated, as Kim and the lama head off once again. 
What is the healing process through which J{im and the old lama must 
pass before they can rest? This extremely complex and interesting question 
can only be answered slowly and deliberately, so carefully does Kipling not 
insist on the confining limits of a jingoistic imperial solution. Kipling will not 
abandon Kim and the old monk with impunity to the specious satisfactions 
of getting credit for a simple job well done. This caution is of course good 
novelistic practice, but there are other imperatives-emotional, cultura~ 
aesthetic. Kim must be given a station in life commensurate with his stub­
bornly fought for identity. He has resisted Lurgan Sahib's illusionistic temp­
tations and asserted the fact that he is Kim; he has maintained a Sahib's status 
even while remaining a graceful child of the bazaars and the rooftops; he has 
played the game well, fought for Britain at some risk to his life and occasion­
ally with brilliance; he has fended off the woman ofShamlegh. Where should 
he be placed? And where the lovable old cleric? 
Readers of Victor Turner's anthropological theories will recognize in 
Kim's displacements, disguises, and general (usually salutary) shiftiness the 
essential characteristics of what Turner calls the liminal. Some societies, 
Turner says, require a mediating character who can knit them together into 
community, turn them into something more than a collection of administra­
tive or legal structures. The Pleasures of Imperialism 
Liminal [or threshold] entities, such as neophytes in initiation or pu­
berty rites, may be represented as possessing nothing. They may be 
disguised as monsters, :wear only a strip of clothing, or even go naked, 
to demonstrate that they have no status, property, insignia .... It is as 
if they are being reduced or groomed down to a uniform condition to 
be fashioned anew and endowed with additional powers to enable them 
to cope with their new station in life.130 
That Kim himself is both an Irish outcast boy and later an essential player 
in the British Secret Service Great Game suggests Kipling's uncanny under.,. 
standing of the workings a~d managing control of societies. According to 
Turner, societies can be neither rigidly run by "structures" nor completely 
overrun by marginal, prophetic, and alienated figures, hippies or millenari­
ans; there has to be alternation, so that the sway of one is enhanced or 
tempered by the inspiration of the other. The liminal figure helps to maintain 
societies, and it is this procedure that Kipling enacts in the climactic mo­
ment of the plot and the transformation of Kim's character. 
To work out these matters, Kipling engineers Kim's illness and the lama's 
desolation. There is also the small practical device of having the irrepress­
ible Babu-Herbert Spencer's improbable devotee, Kim's native and secular 
mentor in the Great Game--turn up to guarantee the success of Kim's 
exploits. The packet of incriminating papers that prove the Russo-French 
machinations and the rascally wiles of an Indian prince is safely taken from 
Kim. Then Kim begins to feel, in Othello's words, the loss of his occupation: 
All that while he felt, though he could not put it into words, that his 
soul was out of gear with its surroundings--a cog-wheel unconnected 
with any machinery, just like the idle cog-wheel of a cheap Beheea 
sugar-crusher laid by in a corner. The breezes fanned over him, the 
parrots shrieked at him, the noises of the populated house behind­
squabbles, orders, and reproofs--hit on dead ears. 131 
In effect Kim has died to this world, has, like the epic hero or the liminal 
personality, descended to a sort of underworld from which, if he is to 
emerge, he will arise stronger and more in command than before. 
The breach between Kim and "this world" must now be healed. The next 
page may not be the summit of Kipling's art, but it is close to that. The 
passage is structured around a gradually dawning answer to Kim's questi~n: 
"I am Kim. And what is Kim?" Here is what happens: 
He did not want to cry-had never felt less like crying in his 
life--but of a sudden easy, stupid tears trickled down his nose, and with CONSO.LIDATED VISION 
an almost audible click he felt the wheels of his being lock up anew on 
the world without. Things that rode meaningless on the eyeball an 
instant before slid into proper proportion. Roads were meant to be 
walked upon, houses to be lived in, cattle to be driven, fields to be tilled, 
and men and women to be talked. to. They were all real and true­
solidly planted upon the feet-perfectly comprehensible-clay of his 
clay, neither more nor less .... m 
Slowly Kim begins to feel at one with himself and with the world. Kipling 
goes on: 
There stood an empty bullock-cart on a little knoll half a mile away, 
with a young banian tree behind--a lookout, as it were, above some 
new-ploughed levels; and his eyelids, bathed in soft air, grew heavy as 
he neared it. The ground was good clean dust-not new herbage that, 
living, is half-way to death already, but the hopeful dust that holds the 
seed to all life. He felt it between his· toes, patted it with his palms, and 
joint by joint, sighing luxuriously, laid him down full length along in 
the shadow of the wooden-pinned cart. And Mother Earth was as 
faithful as the Sahiba [the Widow ofKulu, who has been tending Kim]. 
She breathed through him to restore the poise he had lost lying so long 
on a cot cut off from her good currents. His head lay powerless upon 
her breast, and his opened hands surrendered to her strength~ The 
many-rooted tree above him, and even the dead man-handled wood 
beside, knew what he sought, as he himself did not know. Hour upon 
hour he lay deeper than sleep.133 
As Kim sleeps, the lama and Mahbub discuss the boy's fate; both men know 
he is healed, and so what remains is the disposition of his life. Mahbub wants 
him back in service; with that stupefYing innocence of his, the lama suggests 
to Mahbub that he should join both chela and guru as pilgrims on the way 
of righteousness. The novel concludes with the lama revealing to Kim that 
all is now well, for hav!ng seen 
"all Hind, from Ceylon in the sea to the hills, and my own Painted 
Rocks at Suchzen; I saw every camp and village, to the least, where we 
have rested. I saw them at one time and in one place; for they are within 
the Soul. By this I knew the Soul has passed beyond the illusion of 
Time and Space and of Things. By this I knew I was free."134 
Some of this is mumbo jumbo, of course, but it should not all be dismissed. 
The lama's encyclopedic vision of freedom strikingly resembles Colonel Tbe Pleasures oflmperialism 
'Creighton's Indian Survey, in which every camp and village is duly noted. 
The difference is that the positivistic inventory of places and peoples within 
the scope of British dominion becomes, in the lama's generous inclusiveness, 
a redemptive and, for Kim's sake, therapeutic vision. Everything is now held 
together. At its center resides Kim, the boy whose errant spirit has regrasped 
things "with an almost audible click." The mechanical metaphor of the soul 
being put back on the rails, so to speak, somewhat violates the elevated and 
edifying situation, but for an English writer situating a young white male 
· coming back to earth in a vast country like India, the ·figure is apt. After all, 
the Indian railways were British-built and assured some greater hold than 
before over the place. 
Other writers before Kipling have written this type of regrasping-of-life 
scene, most notably George Eliot in Middlemarch and Henry James in The 
Portrait of a Lady, the former influencing the latter. In both cases the heroine 
(Dorothea Brooke and Isabel Archer) is surprised, not to say shocked, by the 
sudden revelation of a lover's betrayal: Dorothea sees Will Ladislaw appar­
ently tlirting with Rosamond Viney, and Is~bel intuits the dalliance between 
her husband and Madame Merle. Both epiphanies are followed by long 
nights of anguish, not unlike Kim's illness. Then the women awake to a new 
awareness of themselves and the world. The scenes in both novels are 
remarkably similar, and Dorothea Brooke's experience can serve here to 
describe both. She looks out onto the world past "the narrow cell of he~ 
calamity," sees the 
fields beyond, outside the entrance-gates. On the road there was a man 
with a bundle on his back and a woman carrying a baby ... she felt the 
largeness of the world and the manifold wakings of men to labour and 
endurance. She was a part of that involuntary palpitating life, and could 
neither look out on it from her luxurious shelter as a mere spectator, 
nor hide her eyes in selfish complaining. 135 
Eliot and james intend such scenes not only as moral reawakenings, but 
as moments in which the heroine gets past, indeed forgives, her tormentor 
by seeing herself in the larger scheme of things. Part of Eliot's strategy is to 
have Dorothea's earlier plans to help her friends be vindicated; the reawak­
ening scene thus confirms the impulse to be in, engage with, the . world. 
Much the same movement occurs in Kim, except that the world is defined 
as liable to a soul's locking up on it. The passage from Kim I quoted earlier 
has a kind of moral triumphalism carried in its accentuated inflections of 
purpose, will, voluntarism: things slide into proper proportion, roads are 
meant to be walked on, things are perfectly comprehensible, solidly planted 144 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
on the feet, and so on. Above the passage are "the wheels" of Kim's being 
as they "lock up anew on the world without." And this series of motions is 
subsequently reinforced and consolidated by Mother Earth's blessing upon 
Kim as he reclines next to the cart: "she breathed through him to restore 
what had been lost." Kipling renders a powerful, almost instinctual desire 
to restore the child to its mother in a pre-conscious, undefiled, asexual 
relationship. 
But whereas Dorothea and Isabel are described as inevitably being part of 
an "involuntary, palpitating life," Kim is ·portrayed as retaking voluntary 
hold of his life. The difference is, I think, capital. Kim's newly sh~rpened 
apprehension of mastery, of "locking up," of solidity, of moving from limi­
nality to domination is to a very great.extent a function of being a Sahib in 
colonial India: what Kipling has Kim go through is a ceremony of reappro­
priation, Britain (through a loyal Irish subject) taking hold once again of 
India. Nature, the involuntary rhythms of restored health, comes to Kim 
after the first, largely political-historical gesture is signalled by Kipling on his 
behalf. In contrast, for the European or American heroines in Europe, the 
world is there to be discovered anew; it requires no one in particular to 
direct it or exert sovereignty over it. This is not the case in British India, 
which would pass into chaos or insurrection unless roads were walked upon 
properly, houses lived in the right way, men and women talked to in the 
correct tones. 
In one of the finest critical accounts of Kim, Mark Kinkead-Weekes 
suggests that Kim is unique in Kipling's oeuvre because what was clearly 
meant as a resolution for the novel does not really work. Instead, Kinkead­
Weekes says, the artistic triumph transcends even the intentions of Kipling 
the author: 
[The novel] is the product of a peculiar tension between different ways 
of seeing: the affectionate fascination with the kaleidoscope of external 
reality for its own sake; the negative capability getting under the skin 
of attitudes different from one another and one's own; and finally, a 
product of this last, but at its most intense and creative, the triumphant 
achievement of an anti-self so powerful that it became a touchstone for 
everything else-the creation of the Lama. This involved imagining a 
point ef view and a personality almost at the furthest point of view from 
Kipling himself, yet it is explored so lovingly that it could not but act 
as a catalyst towards some deeper synthesis. Out of this particular 
challenge-preventing self-obsession, probing deeper than a merely 
objective view of reality outside himself, enabling him now to see, think Tbe Plea.rure.r of Imperiali.rm 145 
and feel beyond himself-came the new vision of Kim, more inclusive, 
complex, humanised, and mature than that of any other work.136 
However much we may agree with some of the insights in this rather 
subtle reading, it is, in my opinion, rather too ahistorical. Yes, the lama is a 
kind of anti-self, and, yes, Kipling can get into the skin of others with some 
sympathy. But no, Kipling never forgets that Kim is an irrefragable part of 
British India: the Great Game does go on, with Kim a part of it, no matter 
how many parables the lama fashions. We are naturally entitled to read Kim 
as a novel belonging to the world's greatest literature, free to some degree 
from its encumbering his~prical and political circumstances. Yet by the same 
token, we must not unilaterally abrogate the connections in it, and carefully 
observed by Kipling, to its contemporary actuality. Certainly Kim, Creigh­
ton, Mahbub, the Babu, and even the lama see India as Kipling saw it, as a 
part of the empire. And certainly Kipling minutely preserves the traces of 
this vision when he has Kim-a humble Irish boy, lower on the hierarchical 
scale than full-blooded Englishmen-reassert his British priorities well 
before the lama comes along to bless them. 
Readers of Kipling's best work have regularly tried to save him from 
himself. Frequently this has had the effect of confirming Edmund Wilson's 
celebrated judgement about Kim: 
Now what the reader tends to expect is that Kim will come eventually 
to realize that he is delivering into bondage to the British invaders 
those whom he has always considered his own people and that a 
struggle between allegiances will result. Kipling has established for the 
reader-and established with considerable dramatic effect-the con­
trast between the East, with its mysticism and sensuality, its extremes 
of saintliness and roguery, and the English, with their superior organi­
zation, their confidence in modern method, their instinct to brush away 
like cobwebs the native myths and beliefs. We have been shown two 
entirely different worlds existing side by side, with neither really un­
derstanding the other, and we have watched the oscillation of Kim, as 
he passes to and fro between them. But the parallel lines never meet; 
the alternating attractions felt by Kim never give rise to a genuine 
struggle. . . . The fiction of Kipling, then, does not dramatise any 
fundamental conflict because Kipling would never face one.137 
There is an alternative to these two views, I believe, that is more accurate 
about and sensitive to the actualities oflate-nineteenth-century British India CONSOLIDAT'ED VISION 
as Kipling, and others, saw them. The conflict between Kim's colonial 
service and loyalty to his Indian companions is unresolved not because 
Kipling could not face it, but because for Kipling there was no conflict; one 
purpose of the novel is in fact to show the absence of conflict once Kim is 
cured of his doubts, the lama of his longing for the River, and India of a few 
upstarts and foreign agents. That there might have /Jem a conflict had Kipling 
considered India as unhappily subservient to imperialism, we can have no 
doubt, but he did not: for him it was India's best destiny !O be ruled by 
England. By an equal and opposite reductiveness, if one ·reads Kipling not 
simply as an "imperialist minstrel" (which he was not) but as someone who 
read Frantz Fanon, met Gandhi, absorbed their lessons, and remained stub­
bornly unconvinced by them, one seriously distorts his context, which he 
refines, elaborates, and illuminates. It is crucial to remember that there were 
no ·appreciable deterrents to the imperialist world-view Kipling held, any 
more than there were alternatives-to imperialism for Conrad, however much 
he recognized its evils. Kipling was therefore untroubled by the notion of an 
independent India, although it is true to say that his fiction represents the 
empire and its conscious legitimizations, which in fiction (as opposed to 
discursive prose) incur ironies and problems of the kind encountered in 
Austen or Verdi and, we shall soor'i: see, in Camus. My point in this con­
trapuntal reading is to emphasize and highlight the disjunctions, not to 
overlook or play them down. 
Consider two episodes in Kim. Shortly after the lama and his chela leave 
Umballa, they meet the elderly, withered former soldier "who had served 
the Government in the days of the Mutiny." To a contemporary reader "the 
Mutiny" meant the single most important, well-known, and violent episode 
of the nineteenth-century Anglo-Indian relationship: the Great Mutiny of 
1857, which began in Meerut on May 1o and led to the capture of Delhi. An 
enormous number ofbooks (e.g., Christopher Hibbert's The Great Mutiny), 
British and Indian, cover the "Mutiny" (referred to as a "Rebellion" by 
Indian writers). What caused the "Mutiny"-here I shall use the ideologi­
cally British designation-was the suspicion of Hindu and Muslim soldiers 
in the Indian army that their bullets were greased ·with cow's fat (unclean 
to Hindus) and pig's fat (unclean to Muslims). In fact the causes of the 
Mutiny were constitutive to British imperialism itself, to an army largely 
staffed by natives and officered by Sahibs, to the anomalies of rule by the East 
India Company. In addition, there was a great deal of underlying resentment 
about white Christian rule in a country of many other races and cultures, all 
of whom most probably regarded their subservience to the British as degrad­
ing. It was lost on none of the mutineers that numerically they vastly 
outnumbered their ·superior officers. The Pleasures of Imperialism 
In both Indian and British history, the Mutiny was a clear demarcation. 
Without going into the complex structure of actions, motives, events, and 
moralities debated endlessly during and since, we can say that to the British, 
who brutally and severely put the Mutiny down,· all their actions were 
retaliatory; the mutineers murdered Europeans 1 they said, and such actions 
proved, as ifproofwere necessary; that Indians deserved subjugation by the 
higher civilization of European Britain; after 1857 the East India Company 
was replaced by the much more formal Government of India. For the 
Indians, the Mutiny was a nationalist uprising again~t British rule, which 
uncompromisingly reasserted itself despite abuses, exploitation, and seem­
ingly unheeded native co~plaint. When in 1925 Edward Thompson pub­
lished his powerful little tract The Other Side of the MedaJ-an impassioned 
statement against British rule and for Indian independence--he singled out 
the Mutiny as the great symbolic event by which the two sides, Indian and 
British, achieved their full and conscious opposition to each other. He 
dramatically showed that Indian and British history diverged most emphati­
cally on representations ofit. The Mutiny, in short, reinfOrced the difference 
between colonizer and colonized. 
In such a situation of nationalist and self-justifying inflammation, to be an 
Indian would have meant to feel natural solidarity with the victims of British 
reprisal. To be British meant to feel repugnance and injury-to say nothing 
of righteous vindication--given the terrible displays of cruelty by "natives," 
who fulfilled the roles of savages cast for them. For an Indian, not to have 
had those feelings would have been to belong to a very small minority. It is 
therefore highly significant that Kipling's choice of an Indian to speak about 
the Mutiny is a loyalist soldier who views his countrymen's revolt as an act 
of madness. Not surprisingly, this man is respected by British "Deputy 
Commissioners" who, Kipling tells us, "turned aside from the main road to 
visit him." What Kipling eliminates is the likelihood that his compatriots 
regard him as (at very least) a traitor to his people. And when1 a few pages 
later, the old veteran tells the lama and Kim about the Mutiny, his version 
of the events is highly charged with the British rationale for what happened: 
A madness ate into all the Army, and they turned against their officers. 
That was the first evil, but not past remedy if they had then held their 
hands. But they chose to kill the Sahib's wives and children, Then came 
the Sahibs from over the sea and called them to most strict account 138 
To reduce Indian resentment, Indian resistance (as it might have been 
called) to British insensitivity to "madness," to represent Indian actions as 
mainly the congenital choice of killing British women and children-these CONSOLIDATED VfSION 
are not merely innocent reductions of the nationalist Indian case but tenden­
tious ones. And when Kipling has the old soldier describe the British 
counter-revolt-with its horrendous reprisals by white men bent on "moral" 
action-as "calling" the Indian mutineers "to strict account," we have left 
the world of history and entered the world of imperialist polemic, in which 
the native is naturally a delinquent, the white man a stern but moral parent 
and judge. Thus Kipling gives us the extreme British view on the Mutiny, 
and puts it in the mouth of an Indian, whose more likely nationalist and 
aggrieved counterpart is never seen in the novel. (Similarly Mahbub Ali, 
Creighton's faithful adjutant, belongs to the Pathan people, historically in a 
state of unpacified insurrection against the British throughout the nineteenth 
century, yet here represented as happy with British rule, even a collaborator 
with it.) So far is Kipling from showing two worlds in conflict that he has 
studiously given us only one, and eliminated any chance of conflict appear­
ing altogether. 
The second example confirms the first. Once again it is a small, significant 
moment Kim, the lama, and the Widow ofKulu are en route to Saharunpore 
in Chapter 4· Kim has just been exuberantly described as being "in the 
middle of it, more awake and more excited than anyone," the "it" of Kip­
ling's description standing for "the world in real truth; this was life as he 
would have it-bustling and shouting, the Guckling of belts, the beating of 
bullocks and creaking of wheels, lighting of fires and cooking of food, and 
new sights ai: every tum of the approving eye."139 We have already seen a 
good deal of this side of India, with its color, excitement, and interest 
exposed in all their variety for the English reader's benefit. Somehow, 
though, Kipling needs to show some authority over India, perhaps because 
only a (ew pages earlier he senses in the old soldier's minatory account of 
the Mutiny the need to forestall any funher "madness." After all India itself 
is responsible for both the local vitality enjoyed by Kim and the threat to 
Britain's empire. A District Superintendent of Police trots by, and his ap­
pearance occasions this reflection from the Old Widow: 
"These. be the son to oversee justice. They know the land and the 
customs of the land. The others, all new from Europe, suckled by white 
women and learning our tongue from books, are worse than the pesti­
lence. They do harm to Kings." 140 
Doubtless some Indians believed that English police officials knew the 
country better than the natives, and that such officials--rather than Indian 
rulers--should hold the reins of power. But note that in Kim no one chal­
lenges British rule, and ,no one aniculates any of the local Indian challenges The Pleasures of Imperialism 149 
that must then have been greatly in evidence-even for someone as obdu­
rate as Kipling. Instead we have one character explicitly saying that a 
colonial police official ought to rule India and. adding that she prefers the 
older style of official who (like Kipling and his family) had lived among the 
natives and was therefore better than the newer, academically trained 
bureaucrats. This is a version of the argument of the so-called Orientalists 
in India, who believed that Indians should be ruled according to Oriental­
Indian modes by India "hands," but in the process Kipling dismisses as 
academic all the philosophical or ideological approaches contending with 
Orientalism. Among those discredited styles of rule were Evangelicalism 
(the missionaries and reformers, parodied in Mr. Hennen), Utilitarianism 
and Spencerianism .(parodied in the Babu), and of course the unnamed 
academics lampooned as "worse than the pestilence." It is interesting that, 
phrased the way it is, the widow's approval is wide enough to include police 
officers like the Superintendent, as well as a flexible educator like Father 
Victor, and the quietly authoritative figure of Colonel Creighton. 
Having the widow express what is in effect a son of uncontested norma­
tive judgement about India and its rulers is Kipling's way of demonstrating 
that natives accept colonial rule so long as it is the right kind. Historically 
this has always been how European imperialism made itself palatable to 
itself, for what could be better for its self-image than native subjects who 
express assent to the outsider's knowledge and power, implicitly accepting 
European judgement on the undeveloped, backward, or degenerate nature 
of their own society? If one reads Kim as a boy's adventure or as a rich and 
lovingly detailed panorama of Indian life, one is not reading the novel that 
Kipling in fact wrote, so carefully inscribed is it with these considered views, 
suppressions, and elisions. As Francis Hutchins puts it in The Illu.rion of 
Permanence: British Imperialinn in India, by the late nineteenth century, 
An India of the imagination was created which contained no elements 
of either social change or political menace. Orientalization was the 
result of this effort to conceive of Indian society as devoid of elements 
hostile to the perpetualization of British rule, for it was on the basis of 
this presumptive India that Orientalizers sought to build a permanent 
rule.•4• 
Kim is a major contribution to this Orientalized India of the imagination, as 
it is also to what historians have come to call "the invention of tradition." 
There is still more to be noted. Doning Kim's fabric is a scattering of 
editorial asides on the immutable nature of the Oriental world as distin­
guished from the white world, no less immutable. Thus, for example, "Kim IJO CONSOLIDATED VISION 
would lie like an Oriental"; or, a bit later, "all hours of the twenty-four are 
alike to Orientals"; or, when Kim pays for train tickets with the lama's 
money.he keeps one anna per rupee for himself, which, Kipling says, is "the 
immemorial commission of,Asia"; later still Kipling refers to "the huckster 
instinct of the East"; at a train platform, Mahbub's retainers "being natives" 
have not unloaded the trucks which they should have; Kim's ability to sleep 
as the trains roar is an instance of"the Oriental's indifference to mere noise"; 
as the camp breaks up, Kipling says that it is done "swiftly-as Orientals 
understand speed-with long explanations, with abuse and windy talk, 
carelessly, amid a hundred checks for little things forgotten"; Sikhs are 
characterized as having a special "love of money"; Hurree Babu equates 
being a Bengali with being fearful; when he hides the packet taken from the 
foreign agents, th_e Babu "stows the entire trove about his body, as only 
Orientals can." 
None of this is unique to Kipling. The most cursory survey of late­
nineteenth-century Western culture reveals an immense reservoir of popu­
lar wisdom of this son, a good deal of which, alas, is still very much alive 
today. Furthermore, as John M. MacKenzie has shown in his valuable book 
Propaganda and Empire, manipulative devices from cigarette cards, postcards, 
sheet music, almanacs, and manuals to music-hall entertainments, toy sol­
diers, brass band concerts, and board games extolled the empire and stressed 
its necessity to England's strategic, moral, and· economic well-being, at the 
same time characterizing the dark or inferior races as unregenerate, in need 
of suppression, severe rule, indefinite subjugation. The cult of the military 
personality was prominent, usually because such personalities had managed 
to bash a few dark heads. Different rationales for holding overseas territories 
were given; sometimes it was profit, other times strategy or competition with 
other imperial powers (as in Kim: in The Strange Ride ofRutlyt~rd Kipling Angus 
Wilson mentions that as early as age sixteen Kipling proposed at a school 
debate the motion that "the advance of Russia in Central Asia is hostile to 
British Power"). 142 The one thing that remains constant is the subordination 
of the non-white. 
Kim is a work of great aesthetic merit; it cannot be dismissed simply as the 
racist imagining of one disturbed and ultra-reactionary imperialist. George 
Orwell was certainly right to comment on Kipling's unique power to have 
added phrases and concepts to the languag~East is East, and West is West; 
the White Man's Burden; somewhere East of Suez-and right also to say 
that. Kipling's concerns are both vulgar and permanent, of urgent interest. 143' 
One reason for Kipling's power is that he was an artist of enormous gifts; 
· what he did in his an was to elaborate ideas that would have had far ·less 
permanence, for all their vulgarity, without the art. But he was also sup-The Pleasures of Imperialism IJI 
ported by (and therefore could use) the authorized. monuments of nine­
teenth-century European culture, and the inferiority of non-white races, the 
necessity that they be ruled by a superior race, and their absolute unchang­
ing essence was a more or less unquestioned axiom of modern life. 
True, there were debates about how the colonies were to be ruled, or 
whether some of them should be given up. Yet no one with any power tO 
influence public discussion or policy demurred as to the basic superiority of 
the white European male, who should always retain the upper hand. State­
ments like "The Hindu is inherently untruthful .and lacks moral courage" 
were expressions of wisdom from which very few, least of all the governors 
of Bengal, dissented; similarly, when a historian oflndia like Sir H.M. Elliot 
planned his W()rk, central to it was the notion of Indian barbarity. Climate 
and geography dictated certain character traits in the Indian; Orientals, 
according to Lord Cromer, one of their most redoubtable rulers, could not 
learn to walk on sidewalks, could not tell the truth, could not use logic; the 
Malaysian native was essentially lazy, just as the north European was essen­
tially energetic and resourceful. V. G. Kiernan's book The Lords of Human 
Kind, referred to earlier, gives a remarkable picture ofhow widespread these 
views were. As I suggested earlier, disciplines like colonial economics, 
anthropology, history, and sociology were built out of these dicta, with the 
result , that almost to a man and woman the Europeans who dealt with 
colonies like India became insulated from the facts of change and national­
ism. A whole experience-described in meticulous detail in Michael Ed­
wardes's TIN Sahi!Js and the Lotus-with its own integral history, cuisine, 
dialect, values, and tropes more or less detached itself from the teeming, 
contradictory realities of India and perpetuated itself heedlessly. Even Karl 
Marx succumbed to thoughts of the changeless Asiatic village, or agricul­
ture, or despotism. 
A young Englishman sent to India to be a part of the "covenanted" civil 
service. would belong to a class whose national dominance over each and 
every Indian, no matter how aristocratic and rich, was absolute. He would 
have heard the same stOries, read the same books, learned the same lessons, 
joined the same clubs as all the other young colonial officials. Yet, Michael 
Edwardes says, "few really bothered to learn the language of the people they 
ruled with any fluency, and they were heavily dependent on their native 
clerks, who had taken the trouble to learn the language of their conquerors, 
and were, in many cases, not at all unwilling to use their masters' ignorance 
to· their own advantage." 144 Ronny Heaslop in Forster's A Passage to India is 
an effective portrait of such an official. 
All of this is relevant to Kim, whose main figure of worldly authority is 
Colonel Creighton. This ethnographer-scholar-soldier is no· mere creature IJ2 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
of invention, but almost certainly a figure drawn from Kipling's experiences 
in the Punjab, and he is most interestingly interpreted both as derived from 
earlier figures of authority in colonial India and as an original figure perfect 
for Kipling's new purposes. In the first place, although Creighton is seen 
infrequently and his character is not so fully drawn as Mahbub Ali's or the 
Babu's, he is nevertheless present as a point of reference for the action, a 
discreet director of events, a man whose power is worthy of respect. Yet he 
is no crude martinet. He takes over Kim's life by persuasion, not by imposi­
tion of his rank. He can be flexible when it seems reasonable-who could 
have wished for. a better boss than Creighton during Kim's footloose holi­
days?--and stern when events require it. 
In the second place, it is especially interesting that he is a colonial official 
and scholar. This union of power and knowledge is contemporary with 
Doyle's invention of Sherlock Holmes (whose faithful scribe, Dr. Watson, is 
a veteran of the Northwest Frontier), also a man whose approach to life 
includes a healthy respect for, and protection of, the law allied with a 
superior, specialized intellect inclining to science. In both instances, Kipling 
and Doyle represent for their readers men whose unorthodox style of 
operation is rationalized by new fields of experience turned into quasi­
academic specialties. Colonial rule and crime detection almost gain the 
respectability and order of the classics or chemistry. When Mahbub Ali turns 
Kim in for his education, Creighton, overhearing their conversation, thinks 
"that the boy musm't be wasted if he is as advertised." He sees the world 
from a totally systematic viewpoint. Everything about India interests 
Creighton, because everything in it is significant for his rule. The inter­
change between ethnography and colonial work in Creighton is fluent; ~e 
can study the talented boy both as a future spy and as an anthropological 
curiosity. Thus when Father Victor wonders whether it might not be too 
much for Creighton to attend to a bureaucratic detail concerning Kim's 
education, the colonel dismisses the scruple. "The transformation of a regi­
mental badge like your Red Bull into a son of fetish that the boy follows is 
very interesting." 
Creighton as anthropologist is important for other reasons. Of all the 
modern social sciences, anthropology is the one historically most closely 
tied to colonialism, since it was often the case that anthropologists and 
ethnologists advised colonial rulers on the manners and mores of the native 
people. (Claude Levi-Strauss's allusion to anthropology as ''the handmaiden 
of colonialism" recognizes this; the excellent collection of essays edited by 
Tala! Asad, Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter, 1973, develops the connec­
tions still further; and in Robert Stone's novel on the United States in Latin 
American affairs, A Flagfor Sunrite, 1981, the central character is Holliwell, an The Plea1ures of lmperialilm 153 
anthropologist with ambiguous ties to the CIA.) Kipling was one of the first 
novelists to portray this logical alliance between Western science and politi­
cal power at work in the colonies. 145 And Kipling always takes Creighton 
seriously, which is one of the reasons the Babu is there. The native an­
thropologist, clearly a bright man whose reiterated ambitions to belong to 
the Royal Society are not unfounded, is almost always funny, or gauche, or 
somehow caricatural, not because he is incompetent or inept-on the con­
trary--but because he is not white; that is, he can never be a Creighton. 
Kipling is very careful about this. Just as he could not imagine an India in 
historical flux out o[British control, he could not imagine Indians who could 
be effective and serious in what he and others of the time considered 
exclusively Wes~ern pursuits. Lovable and admirable as he may be, there 
remains in the Babu the grimacing stereotype of the ontologically funny 
native, hopelessly trying to be like "us." 
I said that the figure of Creighton is the culmination of~ change taking 
·place over generations in the personification of British power in India. 
Behind Creighton are late-eighteenth-century adventurers and pioneers 
like Warren Hastings and Roben Clive, whose innovative rule and personal 
excesses required England to subdue the unrestricted authority of the Raj by 
law. What survives of Clive and Hastings in Creighton is their sense of 
freedom, their willingness to improvise, their preference for informality. 
After such ruthless pioneers came Thomas Munro and Mountstuan Elphin­
stone, reformers and synthesizers who were among the first senior scholar­
administrators whose dominion reflected something resembling expen 
knowledge.· There are also the great scholar figures for whom service in 
India was an opponunity.to study an alien culture-men like Sir William 
("Asiatic") Jones, Charles Wilkins, Nathaniel Halhed, Henry Colebrooke, 
Jonathan Duncan. These men belonged to principally commercial enter­
prises, and they seemed not to feel, as Creighton (and Kipling) did, that work . 
in India was as patterned and economical (in the literal sense) as running a 
total system. 
Creighton's norms are those of disinterested government, government 
based not upon whim or personal preference (as was the case for Clive), but 
upon laws, principles of order and control. Creighton embodies the notion 
that you cannot govern India unless you know India, and to know India 
means to understand the way it operates. The understanding developed 
during William Bentinck's rule as Governor-General and drew on Oriental­
ist as well as Utilitarial) principles for ruling the largest number of Indians 
with the greatest benefits (to Indians as well as the British), 146 but it was 
always enclosed by the unchanging fact of British imperial authority, which 
set the Governor apan from ordinary human beings, for whom questions of 1)4 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
right and wrong, of virtue and harm are emotionally involving and impor­
tant. To the government person representing Britain in India, the main thing 
is not whether something is good or evil, and therefore must be changed or 
kept, but whether it works or not, whether it helps or hinders in ruling the 
alien entity. Thus Creighton satisfies the Kipling who had imagined an ideal 
India, unchanging and attractive, as an eternally integral part of the empire. 
Thir was an authority one could give in to. 
In a celebrated essay, "Kipling's Place in the History of Ideas," Noel 
Annan presents the notion that Kipling's vision of society was similar to that 
of the new sociologists--Durkheim, Weber, and Pareto--who 
saw society as a nexus of groups; and the pattern of behaviour which 
these groups unwittingly established, rather than men's wills or any­
thing so vague as a class, cultural or national tradition, primarily deter­
mined. men's actions. They asked how these groups promoted order or 
instability in society, whereas their predecessors had asked whether 
certain groups helped society to progress. 147 
Annan goes on to say that Kipling was similar to the founders of modern 
sociological discourse insofar as he believed efficient government in India 
depended upon "the forces of social control [religion, law, custom, conven­
tion, morality] which imposed upon individuals certain rules which they 
broke at their peril." It had become almost a commonplace of British impe­
rial theory that the British empire was different from (and better than) the 
Roman Empire in that it was a· rigorous system in which order and law 
prevailed, whereas the latter was mere robbery and profit. Cromer makes the 
point in Ancient and Modern Imperiali.rm, and so does Marlow in Heart of 
Darlmerr. 148 Creighton understands this perfectly, which is why he works 
with Muslims, Bengalis, Afghans, Tibetans without appearing ever to belit­
tle their beliefs or slight their differences. It was a natural insight for Kipling 
to have imagined Creighton as a scientist whose specialty includes the 
minute workings of a complex society, rather than as either a colonial 
bureaucrat or a rapacious profiteer. Creighton's Olympian humor, his affec­
tionate but detached attitude to people, his eccentric bearing, are Kipling's 
embellishments on an ideal Indian official. 
Creighton the organization man.notonly presides over the Great Game 
(whose ultimate beneficiary is of course the Kaiser-i-Hind, or Queen Em­
press, and her British people), but also works hand in hand with the novelist 
himsel£ If we. can ascribe a consistent point of view to Kipling, we can find 
it in Creighton; more than anyone else. Like Kipling, Creighton respects the 
distinctions within Indian society. When.Mahbub Ali tells Kim that he must The Pleasures of Imperialism IJJ 
never forget that he is a Sahib, he speaks as Creighton's trusted, experienced 
employee. Like Kipling, Creighton never tampers with the hierarchies, the 
priorities and privileges of caste, religion, ethnicity, and race; neither do the 
men and women who work for him. By the late nineteenth century the 
so-called Warrant of Precedence--which began, according to-Geoffrey 
Moorhouse, by recognizing "fourteen different levels of status"-had ex­
panded to "sixty-one, some reserved for one person, others shared by a 
number of people." 149 Moorhouse speculates that the love-hate relationship 
between British and Indians derived from the complex hierarchical attitudes 
present in both people. "Each grasped the other's basic social premise and 
not only understood it but subconsciously respected it as a curious vari11nt 
of their own." 150 One sees this kind of thinking reproduced nearly every­
where in Kim-Kipling's patiently detailed register-oflndia's different races 
and castes, the acceptance by everyone (even the lama) of the doctrine of 
racial separation, the lines and customs which cannot easily be traversed by 
outsiders. Everyone in Kim is equally an outsider to other groups and an' 
insider in his. 
Creighton's appreciation of Kim's abilities-his quickness, his capacity for 
disguise and for getting into a situation as if it were native to him-is like 
the novelist's interest in this complex and chameleon-like character, who 
darts in and out of adventure, intrigue, episode. The. ultimate analogy is 
between the Great Game and the novel itself. To be able to see all India 
from the vantage of controlled observation: this is one great satisfaction. 
Another is to have at one's fingertips a character who can sportingly cross 
lines and invade territories, a little Friend of all the World-Kim O'Hara 
himself. It is as if by holding Kim at the center of the novel Gust as Creighton 
the spy master holds the boy jn the Great Game) Kipling can have and enjoy 
India in a way that even imperialism never dreamed of. 
What does this mean in terms of so codified and organized a structure as 
the late-nineteenth-century realistic novel? Along with Conrad, Kipling is 
a writer of fiction whose heroes belong to a startlingly unusual world of 
foreign adventure and personal charisma. Kim, Lord Jim, and Kurtz, say, are 
creatures with flamboyant wills who presage later adventurers like T. K 
Lawrence in The Seven Pi/lim of Wisdom and Malraux's Perken in La Voie 
royale. Conrad's heroes, affticted as they may be by an unusual power of 
reflection and cosmic irony, remain in the memory as strong, .often heed­
lessly daring men of action. 
And although their fiction belongs to the genre.of adventure-imperialism 
-along with the work of Rider Haggard, Doyle, Charles Reade, Vernon 
Fielding, G. A. Henty, and dozens of lesser writers-Kipling and Conrad 
claim serious aesthetic and critical attention. CONSOLI DATED VI'S I ON 
But one way of grasping what is unusual about Kipling is to recall briefly 
who his contemporaries were. We have become so used to seeing him 
alongside Haggard and Buchan that we have forgotten that as an artist he 
can justifiably be compared with Hardy, Henry James, Meredith, Gissing, 
the later George Eliot, George Moore, or Samuel Butler. In France, his peers 
are Flaubert and Zola, even Proust and the early Gide. Yet the works of 
these writers are essentially novels of disillusion and disenchantment, 
whereas Kim is not. Almost without exception the protagonist of the late­
nineteenth-century novel is someone who has realized that his or her life's 
project-the wish to be great, rich, or distinguished-is mere fancy, illusion, 
dream. Frederic Moreau in Flaubert's Sentimental Education, or Isabel Archer 
in The Portrait of a Lady, or Ernest Pontifex in Butler's The Way of All 
Fles~the figure is a young man or woman bitterly awakened from a fancy 
dream of accomplishment, action, or glory, forced instead to come to terms 
with a reduced status, betrayed love, and a hideously bourgeois world, crass 
and philistine. 
This awakening is not to be found in Kim. Nothing brings the point home 
more powerfully than a comparison between Kim and his nearly exact 
contemporary Jude Fawley, the "hero" of Thomas Hardy's Jude the Obscure 
(1894). Both are eccentric orphans objectively at odds with their environ­
ment: Kim is an Irishman in India,Jude a minimally gifted rural English boy 
who is interested more in Greek than in farming. Both imagine lives of 
appealing attractiveness for themselves, and both try to achieve these lives 
through apprenticeship of some sort, Kim as chela to the wandering Abbot­
Lama,Jude as a supplicant student at the university. But there the compari­
sons stop. Jude is ensnared by one circumstance after the other; he marries 
the ill-suited Arabella, falls in love disastrously with Sue Bridehead, con­
ceives children who commit suicide, ends his days as a neglected man after 
years of pathetic wandering. Kim, by contrast, graduates from one brilliant 
success to another. 
Yet it is important to insist again on the similarities between Kim and Jude 
the Obscure. Both boys, Kim and Jude, are singled out for their unusual 
pedigree; neither is like "normal" boys, whose parents and family assure a 
smooth passage through life. Central to their predicaments is the problem 
of identity-what to be, where to go, what to do. Since they cannot be like 
the others, who are they? They are restless seekers and wanderers, like the 
archetypal hero of the novel form itself, Don Cl!Iixote, who decisively marks 
off" the world of the novel in its fallen, unhappy state, its "lost transcen­
dence," as Lukacs puts it in The Theory of the Novel, from the happy, satisfied 
world ofthe epic. Every novelistic hero, Lukacs says, attempts to restore the 
lost world of his or her imagination, which in the late-nineteenth-century The Pleasures of Imperialism IJ7 
novel of disillusionment is an unrealizable dream.JSt Jude, like Frederic 
Moreau, Dorothea Brooke, Isabel Archer, Ernest Pontifex, and all the others, 
is condemned to such a fate. The paradox of personal identity is that it is 
implicated in that unsuccessful dream. Jude would not be who he is were it 
not for his futile wish to become a scholar. Escape from being a social 
non-entity holds out the pr?mise of relief, but that is impossible. The 
structural irony is precisely that conjunction: what you wish for is exactly 
what you cannot have. The poignancy and defeated hope at the end of Jude 
the Obscure have become synonymous with Jude's very identity. 
Because he gets beyond this paralyzing, dispiriting impasse, Kim O'Hara 
is so remarkably optimistic a character. Like those of other heroes of impe­
rial fiction, his actions result in victories not defeats. He restores India to 
health, as the invading foreign agents are apprehended and expelled. Part of 
his strength is his deep, almost instinctive knowledge of this difference from 
the Indians around him; he has a special amulet given him during infancy, 
and unlike the other boys he plays with-this is established at the novel's 
opening--he is endowed through natal prophecy with a unique fate of 
which he wishes to make everyone aware. Later he becomes explicitly aware 
of being a Sahib, a white man, and whenever he wavers there is someone to 
remind him that he is indeed a Sahib, with all the rights and privileges of 
that special rank. Kipling even makes the saintly guru affirm the difference 
between a white man and a non-white. 
But that alone does not impart to the novel its curious sense of enjoyment 
and confidence. Compared with James or .Conrad, Kipling was not an intro­
spective writer, nor-from the evidence that we have-did he think of 
himself, like Joyce, as an Artist. The force of his best writing comes from ease 
and fluency, the seeming naturalness of his narration and characterization, 
while the sheer variousness of his creativity rivals that of Dickens and 
Shakespeare. Language for him was not, as it was for Conrad, a resistant 
medium; it was transparent, easily capable of many tones and inflections, all 
of them directly representative of the world he explored. And this language 
gives Kim his sprightliness and wit, his energy and attractiveness. In many 
ways Kim resembles a character who might have been drawn much earlier 
in the nineteenth century, by a writer like Stendhal, for example, whose 
vivid portrayals ofFabrice del Dongo and Julien Sorel have the same blend 
of adventure and wistfulness, which Stendhal called espagnoJisme. For Kim, 
as for Stendhal's characters and unlike Hardy's Jude, the world is full of 
possibilities, much like Caliban's island, "full of noises, sounds, and sweet 
airs, that give delight and hurt not." 
At times, that world is restful, even idyllic. So we get not only the bustle 
and vitality of the Grand Trunk Road, but also the welcoming, gentle CONSOLIDATED VISION 
·pastoralism of the scene en route with the old soldier (Chapter 3) as the little 
group of travellers reposes peacefully: 
There was a drowsy buzz of small life in hot sunshine, a cooing of 
doves, and a sleepy drone of well-wheels across the fields. Slowly and 
impressively the lama began. At the end often minutes the old soldier 
slid from his pony, to hear better as he said, and sat with the reins round 
his wrist. The lama's voice faltered-the periods lengthened. Kim was 
. busy watching a gray squirrel. When the little scolding bunch of fur, 
close pressed to the branch, disappeared, preacher and audience were 
fast asleep, the old officer's strong-cut head pillowed on his arm, the 
lama's thrown back against the tree bole, where it showed like yellow 
ivory. A naked child toddled up, stared, and moved by some quick 
impulse of reverence maoe a solemn little obeisance before the lama­
only the child was so short and fat that it toppled over sideways, and 
Kim laughed at the· sprawling, chubby legs. The child, scared and 
indignant, yelled aloud.U 2 
On all sides of this Edenic composure is the "wonderful spectacle" of the 
Grand Trunk Road, where, as the old soldier puts it, " 'all castes and kinds 
of men move ... Brahmins and chumats, bankers ·and tinkers, barbers and 
bunnias, pilgrims and potters----all the world coming and going. It is to me 
as a river from. which I am withdrawn like a Jog after a fl.ood.' "IH 
One fascinating index of Kim's way with this teeming, strangely hospita­
ble world is his remarkable gift for disguise. We first see him perched on the 
ancient g\ln in a square in Lahore-where it still stands today-an Indian 
boy among other Indian boys. Kipling carefully differentiates the religions 
and backgrounds of each boy (the Muslim, the Hindu, the Irish) but is just 
as careful to show us that none of these identities, though they may hinder 
the other boys, is a hindrance to Kim. He can pass from one dialect, one set 
of values and beliefs, to the other. Throughout the book Kim takes on the 
dialects of numerous Indian communities; he speaks Urdu, English (Kipling 
does a superbly funny, gentle mockery of his stilted Anglo-Indian, finely 
distinguished from the Babu's orotund verbosity), Eurasian, Hindi, and 
Bengali; when Mahbub speaks Pashtu, Kim gets that too; when the lama 
speaks Chinese Tibetan, Kim understands that. As orchestrator of this Babel 
of tongues, this veritable Noah's Ark ofSansis, Kashmiris, Akalis, Sikhs, and 
many others, Kipling also manages Kim's chameleon-like progress dancing 
in and out of it all, like a great actor passing through many situations and 
at home in each. 
How very different this all ~s from the lusterless world of the European The Pleasures oflmperialism 159 
bourgeoisie, whose ambiance as every novelist of importance renders. it 
reconfirms the debasement of contemporary _life, the extinction of all dr.eams 
of passion, success, and exotic adventure. Kipling's fiction offers an antithe­
sis: his world, because it is set in an India dominated by Britain, holds 
nothing back from the expatriate European. Kim shows how a white Sahib 
can enjoy life in this lush complexity; and, I would argue, the absence of 
resistance to European intervention in it-symbolized by Kim's abilities to 
move relatively unscarred through India-is due to its imperialist vision. 
For what one cannot accomplish in one's own Western environment­
where trying to live out the grand dream of a successful quest means coming 
up against one's own mediocrity and the world's corruption and.degrada­
tion----one can do abroad. Isn't it possible in India to do everything? be 
anything? go anywhere with impunity? 
Consider the pattern of Kim's wanderings as they affect the structure of 
the novel. Most of his voyages move within the Punjab, around the axis 
formed by Lahore and Umballa, a British garrison town on the frontier of 
the United Provinces. The Grand Trunk Road, built by the great Muslim 
ruler Sher Shan in the late sixteenth century, runs from Peshawar to Cal­
cutta, aithough the lama never goes farther south and east than Benares. Kim 
makes excursions to Simla, to Lucknow, and later to the Kulu valley; with 
Mahbub ·he goes as far south as Bombay and as far west as Karachi. But the 
overall impression created by these voyages is of carefree meandering. 
Occasionally Kim's trips are punctuated by the requirements of the school 
year at St. Xavier's, but the only serious agendas, the only equivalents of 
temporal pressure on the characters, are (a) the Abbot-Lama's Search, which 
is fairly elastic, and (b) the pursuit and final expulsion of the foreign agents 
trying to stir up trouble on the Northwest Frontier. There are no scheming 
money-lenders here, no village prigs, no vicious gossips or unama·ctive and 
heartless parvenuS', as there are in the novels of Kipling's major European 
contemporaries. 
Now contrast Kim's rather loose structure, based as it is on a luxurious 
geographical and spatial expansiveness, with the tight, relentlessly unforgiv­
ing temporal structure of the European novels contemporary with it. Time, 
says Lukacs in The Theory of the Novel, is the great ironist, almost a character 
in these novels, as it drives the protagonist further into illusion and derange­
ment, and also reveals his or her illusions to be groundless, empty, bitterly 
futile.u 4 In Kim, you have the impression that time is on your side, because 
the geography is yours to move about in more or less freely. Certainly-Kim 
feels that, and so does Colonel Creighton, in his patience, and in the 
sporadic, even vague way he appears and disappears. The opulence of 
India's space, the commanding B.ritish presence there, the sense of freedom I6o CONSOLIDATED VISION 
communicated by the interaction between these two factors add up to a 
wonderfully positive atmosphere irradiating the pages of Kim. This is not a 
driven world of hastening disaster, as in Flaubert or Zola 
The novel's ease of atmosphere also comes, I think, from Kipling's own 
recollected sense of being at home in India In Kim representatives of the Raj 
seem to have no problem with being "abroad"; India for them requires 
no self-conscious apologetic, no embarrassment or unease. The French­
speaking Russian agents admit that in India, "we have nowhere left our mark 
yet,"1ss but the British know they have, so much so that Hurree, that 
self-confessed "Oriental," is agitated by the Russians' conspiracy on behalf 
of the Raj, not his own people. When the Russians attack the lama and rip 
apart his map, the defilement is metaphorically of India itself, and Kim 
corrects this defilement later. Kipling's mind plays over reconciliation, heal­
ing, and wholeness in the conclusion, and his means are geographical: the 
British repossessing India, in order once again to enjoy its spaciousness, to 
be at home in it again, and again. 
There is a striking coincidence between Kipling's reassertion over the 
geography of .India and Camus's in some of his Algerian stories written 
almost a half century later. Their gestures are symptomatic not of confi­
dence, but of a lurking, often unacknowledged malaise, I believe. For if you 
belong in a place, you do not have to keep saying and showing it you just 
are, like the silent Arabs in L 'Etranger or the fuzzy-haired Blacks ·in Heart of 
Darkness or the various Indians in Kim. But colonial, i.e., geographical, 
appropriation requires such assertive inflections, and these emphases are the 
hallmark of the imperial culture reconfirming itself to and for itsel£ 
Kipling's geographical and spatial governance of Kim rather than the 
temporal one of metropolitan European fiction, gains special eminence by 
political and historical factors; it expresses an irreducible political judge­
ment on Kipling's part. It is as if he were saying, India is ours and therefore 
we can see it in this mostly uncontested, meandering, and fulfilling way. 
India is "other'' and, importantly, for all its wonderful size and variety, it is 
safely held by Britain. 
Kipling arranges another aesthetically satisfying coincidence, and it, too, 
must be taken into account. This is the confluence between Creighton's 
Great Game and Kim's inexhaustibly renewed capacity for disguises and 
adventure; Kipling keeps the two tightly connected. The first is a device of 
political surveillance and control; the second, at a deeper and interesting 
level, is a wish-fantasy of someone who would like to think that everything 
is possible, that one can go anywhere and be anything. T. E. Lawrence in 
The Seven Pillars of Wisdom expresses this fantasy over and over, as he The Pleasures of Imperialism 161 
reminds us how he-a blond, blue-eyed Englishman-moved among the 
desert Arabs as if he were one of them. 
I call this a fantasy because, as both Kipling and Lawrence endlessly 
remind us, no one-least of all actual whites and non-whites in the colo­
nies-ever forgets that "going native" or playing the Great Game depends 
on the rock-like foundations of European power. Was there ever a native 
fooled by the blue-or green-eyed Kims and T. E. Lawrences who passed 
among them as agent adventurers? I doubt it, just as I doubt that any white 
man or woman lived within the orbit of European imperialism who ever 
forgot that the discrepancy in power between the white rulers and the native 
subjects was absolute, intended to be unchanging, rooted in cultural, politi­
ca~ and economic reality. 
Kim, the positive boy hero who travels in disguise all over India, across 
boundaries and rooftops, into tents and villages, is everlastingly responsible 
to British power, represented by Creighton's Great Game. The reason we 
can see that so clearly is that since Kim was written India has become 
independent, just as since the publication of Gide's The Immoralist and 
Camus's The Stranger Algeria has become independent of France. To read 
these major works of the imperial period retrospectively and heterophoni­
cally with other histories and traditions counterpointed against them, to read 
them in the light of decolonization, is neither to slight their great aesthetic 
force, nor to treat them reductively as imperialist propaganda. Still, it is a 
much graver mistake to read them stripped of their affiliations with the facts 
of power which informed and enabled them. 
The device invented by Kipling by which British control over India 
(the Great Game) coincides in detail with Kim's disguise fantasy to be .at 
one with India, and later to heal its defilements, obviously could not have 
occurred without British imperialism. We must read the novel as the real­
ization of a great cumulative process, which in the closing years of the 
nineteenth century is reaching its last major moment before Indian inde­
pendence: on the one hand, surveillance and control over India; on the 
other, love for and fascinated attention to its every detail. The overlap 
between the political hold of the one and the aesthetic and psychological 
pleasure of the other is made possible by British imperialism itself; Kipling 
understood this, yet many of his later readers refuse to accept this trou­
bling, even embarrassing truth. And it was not just Kipling's recognition of 
British imperialism in general, but imperialism at that specific moment in 
its history, when it had almost lost sight of the unfOlding dynamics of a 
human ·and secular truth: the truth that India had existed before the Euro­
peans arrived, that control was seized by a European power, and that CONSOLIDATED VISION 
Indian resistance to that power would inevitably struggle out from under 
British subjugation. 
In reading Kim today we can watch a great artist in a sense blinded by his 
own insights about India, confusing the realities that he saw with such color 
and ingenuity, with the notion that they were permanent and essential. 
Kipling takes from the novel form qualities that he tries to bend to this 
basically obfuscatory end. But it is surely a great artistic irony that he does 
not truly succeed in this obfuscation, and his attempt to use the novel for .this 
purpose reaffirms his aesthetic integrity. Kim most assuredly is tuJt a political 
tract. Kipling's choice of the novel form and of his character Kim O'Hara to 
engage profoundly with an India· that he loved but could not properly 
have--this is what we should keep resolutely as the book's central meaning. 
Then we can read Kim as a great document of its historical moment and, too, 
an aesthetic milestone along the way to midnight August 14-15, 1947, a 
moment whose children have done so much to revise our sense of the past's 
richness and its enduring problems. 
( VI ) 
The Native Under Control 
I. have been trying, on the one hand, to focus on those aspects of an ongoing 
European culture that imperialism made use of as its successes acceler­
ated and, on the other, to describe how it was that the imperial European 
would not or could not see that he or she was an imperialist and, ironically, 
how it was that the non-European in the same circumstances saw the 
European only as imperial. "For the native," Fanon says, such a European 
value as "objectivity is always directed against him."ts 6 
Even so, can one speak ofimperialism as being so ingrained in nineteenth­
century Europe .as to have become in4istinguishable from the culture as a 
whole? What is the meaning of a word like "imperialist" when it is used for 
Kipling's jingoist work as well for his subtler literary work, or for his 
contemporaries Tennyson and Ruskin? Is every cultural artefact theoreti­
cally implicated? 
Two answers propose themselves. No, we must say, such concepts as 
"imperialism" have a generalized quality that masks with an unacceptable 
vagueness the interesting heterogeneity· of Western metropolitan cultures. 
Discriminations must be made between one kind of cultural work and The Native Under Control 
another when it comes to involvement in imperialism; so we can say, for 
example, that for all his illiberalism about India, John Smart Mill was more 
complex and enlightened in his attirudes to the notion of empire than either 
Carlyle or Ruskin (Mill's behavior in the Eyre case was principled, even 
retrospectively admirable). The same is true of Conrad and Kipling as artists 
compared with Buchan or Haggard. Yet the objection that culrure should not 
be considered a pan of iJ!Iperialism can become a tactic to prevent one from 
seriously connecting the two. By looking at culrure and imperialism care­
fully, we may discern various forms in the relationship, and we shall see that 
we can profitably draw connections that enrich and sharpen our reading of 
major culrural texts. The paradoxical point, of course, is . that European 
culrure was no less complex, rich, or interesting for having supported most 
aspects of the imperial experience. 
Let us look at Conrad and Flauben, writers who worked in the second 
half of the nineteenth cenrury, the former concerned explicitly with imperi­
alism, th~ latter implicitly involved with it. Despite their differences both 
writers similarly emphasize characters whose capacity for isolating and 
surrounding themselves in strucrures they create takes the same form as the 
colonizer at the center of an empire he rules. Axel Heyst in Victory and St. 
Antoine in La Tentatio-late works, both-are withdrawn into a place 
where, like guardians of a magic totality, they incorporate a hostile world 
purged of its troubling resistances to their control of it. These solitary 
withdrawals have a long history in Conrad's fiction-Almayer, Kurtz at the 
rnner Station, Jim at Parusan, and most memorably Charles Gould in Sulaco; 
in Flauben they recur with increasing intensity after Madame Bovary. Yet 
unl~ke Robinson Crusoe on his island, these modern versions of the imperi­
alist who attempts self-redemption are doomed ironically to suffer interrup­
tion and distraction, as what they had tried to exclude from their island 
worlds penetrates anyway. The covert infiuence of imperial control in 
Flauben's imagery of solitary imperiousness is striking when juxtaposed 
with Conrad's oven representations. 
Within the codes of European fiction, these interruptions of an imperial 
project are realistic reminders that no one can in fact withdraw from the 
world into a private version of reality. The link back to Don Quixote· is 
obvious, as is the contir,mity with instirutional aspects of the novel form 
itself, where the aberrant individual is usually disciplined and punished in 
the interests of a corporate identity. In Conrad's overtly colonial settings, the 
disruptions are occasioned by Europeans, and they are enfolded within a 
narrative strucrure that is retrospectively resubmitted to European scrutiny 
for interpretation and questioning. One sees this in both the early Lord :Jim 
and the later Victory: as the idealistic or withdrawn white man Oim, Heyst) CONSOLIDATED VISION 
lives a life of somewhat Q!J.ixotic seclusion, his space is invaded by Mephis­
tophelian emanations, adventurers whose subsequent malfeasance is exam­
ined retrospectively by a narrating white man. 
Heart of Darkness is another example. Marlow's audience is English, and 
Marlow himself penetrates to Kurtz's private domain as an inquiring West­
ern mind trying to make sense of an apocalyptic revelation. Most readings 
rightly call attention to Conrad's skepticism about the colonial enterprise, 
but they rarely remark that in telling the story ofhis African journey Marlow 
repeats and confirms Kurtz's action: restoring Africa to European hegemony 
by historicizing and narrating its strangeness. The savages, the wilderness, 
even the surface folly of popping shells into a vast continent-all these 
reaccentuate Marlow's need to place the colonies on the imperial map and 
under the overarching temporality of narratable history, no matter how 
complicated and circuitous the results. 
Marlow's historical equivalents, to take two prominent examples, would 
be Sir Henry Maine and Sir Roderick Murchison, men celebrated for their 
massive cultural and scientific work-work unintelligible except in the 
imperial context. Maine's great study Ancient Law (1861) explores .the struc­
ture oflaw in a primitive patriarchal society that accorded privilege to fixed 
"status" and could not become modem until the transformation to a "con­
tractual" basis took place. Maine uncannily prefigures Foucault's history, in 
Discipline and Punish, of the shift in Europe from "sovereign" to administra­
tive surveillance. The difference is that for Maine the empire became a sort 
oflaboratory for proving his theory (Foucault treats the Benthamite Panop­
ticoli in use at European correctional facilities as the proof of his): appointed 
to the Viceroy's Council in India as legal member, Maine regarded his 
sojourn in the East as an "extended field-trip." He fought the Utilitarians on 
issues concerning the sweeping reform of Indian legislation (two hundred 
pieces of which he wrote), and interpreted his task as the identification and 
preservation oflndians who could be rescued from "status" and, as carefully 
nurtured elites, brought over to the contractual basis of British policy. In 
Village Communities (1871) and later in his Rede Lectures, Maine outlined a 
theory amazingly like Marx's: that feudalism in India, challenged by British 
colonialism, was a necessary development; in time, he argued, a feudal lord 
would establish the basis for Individual ownership and allow a prototype 
bourgeoisie to emerge. 
The equally striking Roderick Murchison was a soldier turned geologist, 
geographer, and administrator of the Royal Geographical Society. As Robert 
Stafford points out in a gripping account of Murchison's life and career, 
given the man's military background, his peremptory conservatism, his The Native Under Control 
inordinate self-confidence and will, his tremendous scientific and acquisitive 
zeal, it was inevitable that he approached his work as a geologist like an 
all-conquering army whose campaigns added power and global reach to the 
British empire. 157 Whether in Britain itself, Russia, Europe, or the An­
tipodes, Africa, or India, Murchison's work was empire. "Travelling and 
colonizing are still as much the ruling passions of Englishmen as they were 
in the days of Raleigh and Drake,'' he once said.158 
Thus in his tales Conrad re-enacts the imperial gesture of pulling in 
virtually the entire world, and he represents its gains while stressing its 
irreducible ironies. His historicist vision overrides the other histories con­
tained in the narrative sequence; its dynamic sanctions Africa, Kurtz, and 
Marlow--despite their radical eccentricity-as objects of a superior West­
em (but admittedly problematic) constitutive understanding. Yet, as I have 
said, much of Conrad's narrative is preoccupied with what eludes articulate 
expressioQ.-the jungle, the desperate natives, the great river, Africa's mag­
nificent, ineffable dark life. On the second of the two occasions when a native 
utters an intelligible word, he thrusts an "insolent black head" through a 
doorway to announce Kurtz's death, as if only a European pretext could 
furnish an African with reason enough to speak coherently. Less the ac­
knowledgement of an essential African difference, Marlow's narrative takes 
the African experience as further acknowledgement of Europe's world sig­
nificance; Africa recedes in integral meaning, as if with Kurtz's passing it had 
once again become the blankness his imperial will had sought to overcome. 
Conrad's readers of the time were not expected to ask about or concern 
themselves with what became of the natives. What mattered to them was 
how Marlow makes sense of everything, for without his deliberately fash­
ioned narrative there is no history worth telling, no fiction worth entertain­
ing, no authority worth consulting. This is a short step away from King 
Leopold's account of his International Congo Association, "rendering lasting 
and disinterested services to the cause of progress," 159 and described by one 
admirer in 188s as the "noblest and most self-sacrificing scheme for African 
development that has ever been or ever will be attempted." 
Chinua Achebe's well-known criticism of Conrad (that he was a racist 
who totally dehumanized Africa's native population) does not go far enough 
in emphasizing what in Conrad's early fiction becomes more pronounced 
and explicit in the late works, like Nostromo and Victory, that do not deal with 
Africa. 160 In Nostromo the history of Costaguana is the merciless one of a 
white family with grandiose schemes and suicidal bent. Neither the local 
Indians nor the ruling-class Spaniards of Sulaco offer an alternative perspec­
tive: Conrad treats them with something of the same pitying contempt and !66 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
exoticism he reserves for African Blacks and Southeast Asian peasants. In the 
end, Conrad's audience was European, and his fiction had the effect not of 
challenging but of confirming that fact and consolidating consciousness of it, 
even though paradoxically his own corrosive skepticism was thereby re­
leased. A similar dynamic appears in Flauben. 
Despite their fineness and reticulation, then, the inclusive cultural forms 
dealing with peripheral non-European settings are markedly ideological and 
selective (even repressive) so far as "natives'' are concerned, just as the 
picturesqueness of nineteenth-century colonial painting 161 is, despite its 
"realism," ideological and repressive: it effectively silences the Other, it 
reconstitutes difference as identity, it rules over and represents domains 
figured by occupying powers, not by inactive inhabitants. The interesting 
question is what, if anything, resisted such directly imperial narratives as 
Conrad's? Was the consolidated vision of Europe unbroken? or was it irre­
sistible and unopposed within Europe? 
European imperialism indeed develaped European opposition-as A. P. 
Thornton, Poner, and Hobson demonstrate 162--between the middle and the 
end of the century; cenainly the Abolitionists, Anthony Trollope, and Gold­
win Smith, for example, were relatively honorable figures among many 
individual and group movements. Still, people like Froude, Dilke, and 
Seeley represented the overwhelmingly more powerful and successful pro­
imperial culture. 163 Missionaries, although they often functioned as agents 
of one or another imperial power throughout the nineteenth cenniry, were 
sometimes able to curb the worst colonial excesses, as Stephen Neill argues 
in Colonia/inn and Christian Mi.r.rions. 164 It is also true that Europeans brought 
modern technological change-steam engines, telegraphs, and even educa­
tion-to some of the natives, benefits that persisted beyond the colonial 
period, although not without negative aspects. But the stattling purity of the 
imperial quest in Heart of Darknes.r-when Marlow acknowledges that he 
always felt a passion to fill in the great blank spaces on the map--remains 
the overwhelming reality, a constitutive reality, in the culture of imperial­
ism~ In its impulsive power the gesture recalls actual explorers and imperial­
ists like Rhodes, Murchison, and Stanley. There is no minimizing the 
discrepant power established by imperialism and prolonged in the colonial 
encounter. Conrad underscores that actuality not just in the content but also 
in the form of Kurtz's seventeen-page report to the Society for the Suppres­
sion of Savage Customs: the aim to civilize and bring light to dark places is 
both antithetical and logically equivalent to its effective end: the desire to 
"exterminate the brutes" who may not be cooperative or may entertain ideas 
about resistance. In Sulaco, Gould is both the mine's patron and the man who The Native Under Control 
plans to blow up the enterprise. No connectives are necessary: the imperial 
vision enables the natives' life and death at the same time. 
But of course the natives could not really nJI be made to disappear, and 
in fact they encroached more and more on the imperial consciousness. And 
what follow are schemes for separating the natives--Africans, Malays, 
Arabs, Berbers, Indians, Nepalese, Javanese, Filipinos--from the white man 
on racial and religious grounds, then for reconstituting them as people 
requiring a European presence, whether a colonial implantation or a master 
discourse in which they could be fitted and put to work. Thus; on the one 
hand, one has Kipling's fiction positing the Indian as a creature clearly 
needing British tutelage, one aspect of which is a narrative that encircles and 
then assimilates India, since without Britain India would disappear into its 
own corruption and underdevelopment. (Kipling here repeats the well­
known views of James and John Stuart Mill and other Utilitarians during 
their tenure at India House.) 165 
Or, on the other hand, one has the shadowy discourse of oolonial capi­
talism, with its roots in liberal free-trade, policies (also deriving from 
evangelical literature), in which, for instance, the indolent native again 
figures as someone whose natural depravity and loose character necessi­
tate a European overlord. We see this in the observations of colonial rul­
ers like Galieni, Hubett Lyautey, Lord Cromer, Hugh Clifford, and John 
Bowring: "His hands are large, and the toes of his feet pliant, being ex­
ercised in climbing trees, and divers other active functions. . . . The 
impressions made upon him are transitory, and he retains a feeble mem­
ory of passing or past events. Ask him his age, he will not be able to an­
swer: who were his ,ancestors? he neither knows nor cares .... His master 
vice is idleness, 'which is his felicity. The labour that necessity demands 
he gives grudgingly." 166 And we see it in the monographic rigors of schol­
arly colonial social scientists like the economic historian Clive Day, who 
in 1904 wrote, "In practice it has been found impossible to secure the ser­
vices of the native [Javanese] population by any appeal to an ambition to 
better themselves and raise their standard. Nothing less than immediate 
material enjoyment will stir them from their indolent routine." 167 These 
descriptions commodified the natives and their labor and glossed over 
the actual histo,rical conditions, spiriting away the facts of drudgery and 
resistance. 168 
But these accounts also spirited away, occluded, and elided the real power 
of the observer, who for reasons guaranteed only by power and by its 
alliance with the spirit of World History, could pronounce on the reality of 
native peoples as from an invisible point of super-objective perspective, r68 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
using the protocols and jargon of new sciences to displace "the natives' " 
point of view. As Romila Thapar points out, for example, 
The history of India became one of the means of propagating those 
interests. Traditional Indian historical writing, with its emphasis on 
historical biographies and chronicles, was largely ignored. European 
writing on Indian history was an attempt to create a fresh historical 
tradition. The historiographical pattern of the Indian past which took 
shape during the colonial period in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries was probably similar to the patterns which emerged in the 
histories of other colonial societies. 169 
Even oppositional think,ers like Marx and Engels were no less capable of 
such pronouncements than French and British governmental spokesmen; 
both political camps relied on colonial documents, the fully encoded dis­
course of Orientalism, for example, and Hegel's view of the Orient and 
Africa as static, despotic, and irrelevant to world history. When on Septem­
ber 17, I8J7, Engels spoke of the Moors of Algeria as a "timid race" because 
they were repressed but "reserving nevertheless their cruelty and vindic­
tiveness while in moral character they stand very low,"170 he was merely 
echoing French colonial doctrine. Conrad similarly used colonial accounts 
oflazy natives, much as Marx and Engels spun out their theories of Oriental 
and African ignorance and superstition. This is a second. aspect of the 
wordless imperial wish; for if the obdurately material natives are trans­
formed from subservient beings into inferior humanity, then the colonizer 
is similarly transformed into an invisible scribe, whose writing reports on the 
Other and at the same time insists on its scientific disinterestedness and (as 
Katherine George has noted) 171 the steady improvement in the condition, 
character, and custom of primitives as a result of their contact with European 
civilization. 1 72 
At the apex of high imperialism early in this century, then, we have a 
conjunctural fusion between, on the one hand, the historicizing codes of 
discursive writing in Europe, positing a world universally available to trans­
national impersonal scrutiny, and, on the other hand, a massively colonized 
world. The object of this consolidated vision is always either a victim or a 
highly constrained character, permanently threatened with severe punish­
ment, despite his or her many virtues, services, or achievements, excluded 
ontologically for having few of the merits of the conquering, surveying, and 
civilizing outsider. For the colonizer the incorporative apparatus requires 
unremitting effort to maintain. For the victim, imperialism offers these 
alternatives: serve or be destroyed. Camu.r and the French Imperia~ Experience 
( VII ) 
Camus and the French Imperial Experience 
Y et not all empires were the same. France's empire, according to one of 
its most famous historians, though no less interested than Britain's in 
profit, plantations, and slaves, was energized by "prestige." 173 Its various 
domains acquired (and sometimes lost) over three centuries were presided 
over by its irradiating "genius," itself a" function of France's "vocation mperi­
eure," in the words of Delavigne and Charles Andre Julien, the compilers of 
a fascinating work, Les Constructeurs de Ia France d'outre-mer. 174 Their cast of 
charac~ersbegins with Champlain and Richelieu, includes such redoubtable 
proconsuls as Bugeaud, conqueror of Algeria; Brazza, the man who estab­
lished the French Congo; Gallieni, the pacifier of Madagascar; and Lyautey, 
along with Cromer the greatest of European rulers of Muslim Arabs. One 
senses. little equivalent of the British "departmental view," and much more 
the personal style of being French in a great assimilationist enterprise. 
Whether this may only be a French self-perception does not really matter, 
since consistency and regularity of appeal were the driving forces in justify­
ing territorial acquisition before, during, and after the fact When Seeley (his 
famous book was translated into French in 1885, and much admired and 
commented upon) said of Britain's empire that it was acquired absentmind­
edly, he was only describing an attitude very different from that of contem­
porary French writers on empire. 
As Agnes Murphy shows, the Franco-Prussian War of18jo.directly stimu­
lated the increase in French geographical societies. 175 Geographical knowl­
edge and exploration were thereafter tied to the discourse (and acquisition) 
of empire, and in the popular prominence of people like Eugene Etienne 
(founder of the Groupe Coloniale in 1892.) one may plot the rise of French 
imperial theory to almost an exact science. After 1872. and for the first time, 
acco!ding to Girardet, a, coherent political doctrine of colonial expansion 
developed at the head of the French state; between 188o and 1895 French 
colonial possessions went from 1.o to 9·5 million square kilometers, from five 
to fifty million native inhabitants. 176 At the Second International Congress 
of Geographical Sciences in t875, attended by die President ofthe Republic, 
the Governor of Paris, the President of the Assembly, Admiral La Rouciere­
Le Noury's opening address revealed the attitude prevalent throughout the 
meeting: "Gentlemen, Providence has dictated to us the obligation of know-qo CONSOLIDATED VISION 
ing the earth and making the conquest of it. This supreme command is one 
of the imperious duties inscribed on our intelligences and on our activities. 
Geography, that science which inspires such beautiful devotedness and in 
whose name so many victims have been sacrificed, has become the philoso­
phy of the earth." 177 
Sociology (inspired by Le Bon), psychology (inaugurated by Leopold de 
Saussure), history, and of course anthropology flourished in the decades 
after 188o, many of them culminating at International Colonial Congresses 
(1889, 1894, etc.) or in specific groups (e.g., the 189o International Congress of 
Colonial Sociology or the 1902 Congress of Ethnographic Sciences in Paris). 
Whole regions of the worl~ were made the objects of learned r:olonial atten­
tion; Raymond Betts mentions that the &vue intemationale de todologie de­
voted annual surveys to Madagascar in 19oo, Laos and Cambodia in 19o8.178 
The ideological theory of colonial assimilation begun under the Revolution 
collapsed, as theories of racial types-Gustave Le Bon's primitive, inferior, 
intermediate, and superior races; or Ernest Seillere's philosophy of pure 
force; or Albert Sarraut's and Paul Leroy-Beaulieu's systematics of c9lonial 
practice; or Jules Harmand's principle of domination 179-guided French 
imperial strategies. Natives and their lands were not to be treated as entities 
that could be made French, but as possessions the immutable characteristics 
of which required separation and subservience, even though this did not rule 
out the mittion r:ivilitalrice. The influence of Fouillee, Clozel, and Giran 
turned such ideas into a language and, in the imperial realms themselves, a 
practice that closely resembled a science, a science of ruling inferiors whose 
resources, lands, and destinies France was in charge of. At best, France's 
relationship with Algeria, Senegal, Mauritania, Indochina was auociation 
through "hierarchic partnership," as Rene Maunier argues in his book The 
SocioJog;y ofColoniet, 180 but Betts rightly notes that nonetheless the theory of 
"imperialism did not occur by invitation but by force, and in the long run, 
all noble doctrines considered, was only successful so long as this ultima ratio 
was apparent." 181 
To compare discussion of empire by and for the French with the actuali­
ties of imperial conquest is to be struck by many disparities and ironies. 
Pragmatic considerations were always allowed for people like Lyautey, 
Gallieni, Faidherbe, Bugeaud-generals, proconsuls, administrators--to act 
with force and draconian dispatch. Politicians like Jules Ferry, who ar­
ticulated imperial policy after (and during) the fact, reserved the right to 
postulate goals that scanted the natives like "Ia gestion m~me et ... Ia defense 
du patrimoine nationale." 1u For the lobbies and what today we call publi­
cists--ranging from novelists and jingoists to _mandarin philosophers--the Camu.r and the French Imperial Experience 
French empire was uniquely connected to the French national identity, its 
brilliance, civilizational energy, special geographical, social, and historical 
development. None of this was consistent or corresponded to daily life in 
Martinique, or Algeria, or Gabon, or Madagascar, and this was, to put it 
mildly, difficult for the natives. In addition, other empires-German, Dutch, 
British, Belgian, American-w:ere jostling France, approaching all-out war 
(as at Fashoda) with it; negotiating with it (as in Arabia in 1917-18), threaten­
ing or emulating it. 183 
In Algeria, however inconsistent the policy of French governments since 
183o, the inexorable process went on to make Algeria French. First the land 
was taken from the natives and their buildings were occupied; then French 
settlers gained control of the cork oak forests and mineral deposits. Then, 
as David Prochaska notes for Annaba (formerly named Bone), "they dis­
placed the Algerians and peopled (places like] Bone with Europeans." 184 For 
several decades after 183o "booty capital" ran the· economy, the native 
population decreased, and settler groups increased. A dual economy came 
into being: "The European economy can be likened by and large to a 
firm-centered capitalist economy, while the Algerian economy can be com­
pared to a bazaar-oriented, pre-capitalist economy." 185 So while "France 
reproduced itself in Algeria," 186 Algerians were relegated to marginality and 
poverty. Prochaska compares a French colon's account of the Bone story with 
one by an Algerian patriot, whose version of events in Annaba "is like 
reading the French historians of Bone turned upside down." 187 
Over and above everything else, Arnaud trumpets the progress made 
by the French in Bone after the mess left by the Algerians. "It is not 
because the 'old city' is dirty" that it should be kept intact, but because 
"it alone permits the visitor ... to understand better the grandeur and 
beauty of the task accomplished by the French in this country in this 
place previously desened, barren and vinually without natural re­
sources," this "small, ugly Arab village of scarcely 115oo people." 188 
No wonder that H'sen Derdour's book on Annaba uses as a title for its 
chapter on the Algerian revolution of 1954-1962, "Algeria, prisoner in a 
universal concentration camp, bursts colonialism asunder and obtains its 
freedom." 189 
Next to Bone is the village of Mondovi, eighteen miles away, founded 
in 1849 by "red" laborers transponed by the government from Paris (as a 
way of getting rid of politically troublesome elements) and endowed with 
land expropriated from Algerian natives. Prochaska's research shows how CONSOL.IDATED VISION 
Mondovi began as a wine-growing satellite of B6ne, a place where in 1913 
Albert Camus was born, the son of a "Spanish charwoman and a French 
cellerman." 190 
Camus is the one author of French Algeria who can with justification be 
considered of world status. As was Jane Austen a century earlier, Camus is 
a novelist from whose work the facts of imperial actuality, so clearly there 
to be noted, have dropped away; as in Austen a detachable ethos has re­
mained, an ethos suggesting universality and humanism, deeply at odds 
with the descriptions of geographical locale plainly given in the fiction. 
Fanny holds both Mansfield Park and the Antigua plantation; France holds 
Algeria and, in the same narrative grasp, Meursault's astonishingly existen­
tial isolation. 
Camus is particularly important in the ugly colonial turbulence of 
France's twentieth-century decolonizing travail. He is a very late imperial 
figure who not only survived the heyday of empire, but survives today as a 
''universalist" writer with roots in a now forgotten colonialism. His retro­
spective relationship with George Orwell is even more interesting . .._ike 
Orwell, Camus became a well-known writer around issues highlighted in the 
193os and 194os: fascism, the Spanish Civil War, resistance to the fascist 
onslaught, issues of poverty and social injustice treated from within the 
discourse of socialism, the relationship between writers and politics, the role 
of the intellectual. Both were famous for the clarity and plainness of their 
style-we should recall Roland Barthes's description of Camus's style in Le 
Degre zero de l'kriture (1953) as ecriture blanche191-as well as the unaffected 
clarity of their political formulations. Both also made the transformation to 
the post-war years with less than happy results. Both, in short, are posthu­
mously interesting because of narratives they wrote that now seem to be 
about a situation that on closer inspection appears quite different. Orwell's 
fictional examinations of British socialism have taken on a prophetic quality 
(if you like them; symptomatic if you do not) in the domain of Cold War 
polemic; Camus's narratives of resistance and existential confrontation, 
which had once seemed to be about withstanding or opposing both mortality 
and Nazism, can now be read as part of the debate about culture and 
imperialism. 
Despite Raymond Williams's rather powerful critique of Orwell's social 
vision, Orwell is regularly claimed by intellectuals on the Left and Right.m 
Was he a neo-conServative in advance of his time, as Norman Podhoretz 
claims, or was he, as Christopher Hitchens more persuasively argues, a hero 
of the Left?193 Camus is somewhat less available to Anglo-American con­
cerns now, but he is cited as critic, political moralist, and admirable novelist 
in discussions of terrorism and colonialism. 194 The striking parallel between Camus and the French Imperial Experience 173 
Camus and Orwell is that both men have become exemplary figures in their 
respective cultures, figures whose significance derives from but nevertheless 
seems w transcend the immediate force of their native context. The note is 
perfectly struck in a description of Camus that comes near the end of Co nor 
Cruise O'Brien's agile demystification of him in a book that in many ways 
resembles (and was written for the same series as) Raymond Williams's 
Modern Mtmert study of Orwell. O'Brien says: 
Probably no European writer of his time left so deep a mark on the 
imagination and, at the same time, on the moral and political con­
sciousness of his own generation and of the next. He was intensely 
European because he belonged to the frontier of Europe and was aware 
of a threat. The threat also beckoned to him. He refused, but not 
without a struggle. 
No, other writer, not even Conrad, is more representative of the 
Western consciousness and conscience in relation w the non-Western 
world. The inner drama of his work is the development of this relation, 
under increasing pressure and in increasing anguish. 19s 
Having shrewdly and even mercilessly exposed the connections between 
Camus's most famous novels and the colonial situation in Algeria, O'Brien 
lets him off the hook. There is a subtle act of transcendence in O'Brien's 
notion of Camus as someone who belonged "to the frontier of Europe," 
when anyone who knows anything about France, Algeria, and Camus­
O'Brien certainly knows a great deal-would not characterize the colonial 
tie as one between Europe and its frontier. Similarly Conrad and Camus are 
not merely representative of so relatively weightless a thing as "Western 
consciousness" but rather of Western dominance in the non-European world. 
Conrad makes this abstract point with unerring power in his essay "Geogra­
phy and Some Explorers," where he celebrates British exploration of the 
Arctic and then concludes with an example of his own "militant geography," 
the way, he says, by "putting my finger on a spot in the very middle of the 
then white heart of Africa, I declared that some day I would go there." 196 
Later of course he does go there, and rehabilitates the gesture in Heart of 
Darlmett. 
The Western colonialism that O'Brien and Conrad are at such pains to 
describe is first a penetration beyond the European frontier and into the hean 
of another geographical entity, and second, it is specific not to an ahistorical 
"Western consciousness ... in relation to the non-Western world" (most 
African or Indian natives considered their burdens as having less to do with 
"Western consciousness" than with specific colonial practices like ·slavery, CONSOLIDATED VISION 
land expropriation, murderous armed force) but to a laboriously constructed 
relationship in which France and Britain called themselves "the West" 
vir-a-vir subservient, lesser peoples in a largely underdeveloped and inert 
"non-Western world."l97 
The elision and compression in O'Brien's otherwise tough-minded analy­
sis of Camus come as he deals with Camus as individual artist, anguished 
over difficult choices. Unlike Sartre and Jeanson; for whom, according to 
O'Brien, the choice to oppose French policy during the Algerian War was 
fairly easy, Camus was born and brought up in French Algeria, his family 
remained there after he began to live in France, and his involvement in the 
struggle with the FLN was a matter of life and death. One can certainly 
agree with this much of O'Brien's claim. What is less easy to accept is how 
O'Brien elevates Camus's difficulties to the symbolic rank of "Western 
consciousness," a receptacle emp,tied of all but its capacity for sentience and 
rellection.-
O'Brien further _rescues Camus from the embarrassment he had put him 
in by stressing the privilege of his individual experience. With this tactic we 
are likely to have some sympathy, for whatever the unfortunate collective 
nature of French colon behavior in Algeria, there is no reason to burden 
Camus with it; his entirely French upbringing in Algeria (well described 
in Herbert Lottman's biography) 198 did not prevent him from producing 
a famous pre-war report on the miseries of the place, most of them due 
to French colonialism.l 99 Here then is a moral man in an immoral situa­
tion. And what Camus focusses on is the individual in a social setting: 
this is as true of L 'Etranger as it is of La Perte and La Chute. He prizes self­
recognition, disillqsioned maturity, and moral steadfastness in the midst 
of a bad situation. 
But three methodological points need to be made. The first is to question 
and deconstruct Camus's choice of geographical setting for L 'Etranger (1941), 
La Perte (1947), and his extremely interesting group of short stories collected 
under the title L 'ExiJ et le royaume (1957). Why was Algeria a setting for 
narratives whose main reference (in th:e case of the first two) has always been 
construed as France generally and, more particularly, France under the Nazi 
Occupation? O'Brien goes further than most in noting that the choice is not 
innocent, that much in the tales (e.g., Meursault's trial) is either a surrepti­
tious or unconscious justification of French rule or an ideological attempt to 
prettify it zoo. But in trying to establish a continuity between Camus as an 
individual artist and French colonialism in Algeria we must ask whether 
Camus's narratives themselves are connected to, and derive advantages 
from, earlier and more overtly imperial French narratives. In widening the 
historical perspective from Camus as an attractively solitary writer of the Camus and the French Imperial Experience 
1940s and 1950s to include the cenrury-old French presence in Algeria, we 
can perhaps better understand not just the form and ideological meaning of 
his narratives, but also the degree to which his work infiects, refers to, 
consolidates, and renders more precise the nature of the French enterprise 
there. 
A second methodological point concerns the type of evidence necessary 
for this wider optic, and the related question of who does the interpreting. 
A European critic of historical bent is likely to believe that Camus repre­
sents the tragically immobilized French consciousness of the European crisis 
near one of its great watersheds; although Camus seems to have regarded 
colon implantations as rescuable and extendable past 196o (the year of his 
death), he was simply wrong historically, since the French ceded possession 
of and all claims on Algeria a mere two years later. Insofar as his work clearly 
alludes to contemporary Algeria, Camus's general concern is the actual state 
of Franco-Algerian affairs, not their history of dramatic changes in their 
long-term destiny. Except occasionally, he usually ignores or overlooks the 
history, which an Algerian for whom the French presence· was a daily 
enactment of power would not do. To an Algerian, therefore, 1961 would 
more likely be seen as the end of a long, unhappy epoch in a history that 
began when the French arrived in 183o, and as the triumphant inauguration 
of a new phase. A correlative way of interpreting Camus's novels therefore 
would be as int~rventions in the history of French efforts in Algeria, making 
and keeping it French, not as novels that tell us about their author's state of 
mind. Camus's incorporations of and assumptions about Algerian history 
would have to be compared with histories written by Algerians after inde­
pendence, in order to get a fuller sense of the contest between Algerian 
nationalism and French colonialism. And it would be correct to regard 
Camus's work as affiliated historically both with the French colonial venture 
itself(since he assumes it to be immutable) and with outright·opposition to 
Algerian independence. This Algerian perspective may unblock and release 
aspects hidden, taken for granted, or denied by Camus. 
Last, there js a crucial methodological value in detail, patience, insistence 
where Camus's h~ghly compressed texts are concerned. The tendency is for 
readers to associate Camus's novels with French novels about France; not 
only because of their language and the forms they seem to take over from 
such illustrious antecedents as Adolphe and Troir Contet, but also because his 
choice of an Algerian locale seems incidental to the pressing moral issues at 
hand. Almost half a century after their first appearance, his novels are thus 
read as parables of the human condition. True, Meursault kills an Arab, but 
this Arab is not named and seems co be without a history, let alone a mother 
and father; true also, Arabs die of plague in Oran, but they are not named CONSOLIDATED VISION 
either, whereas Rieux and Tarrou are pushed forward in the action. One 
ought to read the texts for the richness of what is there, we are likely to say, 
not for what if anything has been excluded. But I want to insist that one finds 
in Camus's novels what they once were thought to have been cleared 
of-detail about that very distinctly French imperial conquest begun in 183o, 
continuing during Camus's life, and projecting into the composition of the 
texts. 
This restorative interpretation is not meant vindictively. Nor do I intend 
after the fact to blame Camus for hiding things about Algeria in his fiction 
that, for example, in the various pieces collected in the Chroniques algiriennes 
he was at pains to explain. What I want to do is to see Camus's fiction as an 
element in France's methodically constructed political geography of Alge­
ria, which took many generations to complete, the better to see it as provid­
ing an arresting account of the political and interpretative contest to 
represent, inhabit, and possess the territory itself-at exactly the time that 
the British were leaving India. Camus's writing is informed by an extraor­
dinarily belated, in some ways incapacitated colonial sensibility, which 
enacts an imperial gesture within and by means of a form, the realistic novel, 
well past its greatest achievements in Europe. 
As locus classicus I shall use an episode near the end of "La Femme 
adultere" whenJanine, the protagonist, leaves her husband's bedside during 
a sleepless night in a small hotel in the Algerian countryside. A formerly 
promising law student, he has become a travelling salesman; after a long and 
tiring bus journey the .couple arrives at their destination, where he makes the 
rounds of his various Arab clients. During the trip J anine has been impressed 
with the silent passivity and incomprehensibility of the native Algerians; 
their presence seems like a barely evident natural fact, scarcely noticed by 
her in her emotional trouble. When she leaves the hotel and her sleeping 
husband, Janine encounters the night watchman, who speaks to her in 
Arabic, a language she appears not to understand. The climax of the story 
is a remarkable, almost pantheistic communion she has with the sky and the 
desert. Clearly, I think, Camus's intention is to present the relationship 
between woman and geography in sexual terms, as an alternative to her now 
nearly dead relationship with her husband; hence the adultery referred to in 
the story's title. 
She was turning with them [the drifting stars in a sky "moving in a sort 
of slow gyration"], and the apparently stationary progress little by little 
identified her with the core of her being, where cold and desire were 
now vying with each other. Before her the stars were falling one by one 
and being snuffed out among the stones of the desert, and each time Camus and the French Imperial Experience 
Janine opened a little more to the night. Breathing deeply, she forgot 
the cold, the dead weight of others, the craziness or stuffiness oflife, the 
long anguish of living and dying [le poids des ~tres, Ia vie demente ou 
figee, Ia longue angoisse de vivre et de mourir]. After so many years of 
mad, aimless fleeing from fear, she had come to a stop at last. At the 
same time, she seemed to recover her roots and the sap again rose in 
her against the parapet as she strained toward the moving sky; she was 
merely waiting for her fluttering heart to calm down and establish 
silence within her. The last stars of the constellations dropped their 
clusters a little lower on the desert horizon and became still. Then, with 
unbearable gentleness, the water of night began to fill J anine, drowned 
the cold, rose gradually from the hidden core of her being, rising up 
even to her mouth full of moans [l'eau de Ia nuit ... monta peu a peu 
du centre obscur de son ~tre et deborda en flots ininterrompus jusqu'a 
sa bouche pleine de gemissements]. The next moment, the whole sky 
stretched over her, fallen on her back on the cold ·earth. 201 
The effect is that of a moment out of time in which J anine escapes the 
sordid narrative of her present life and enters the kingdom of the collection's 
tide; or as Camus put it in a note he wanted to insert in subsequent editions 
of the collection, "au royaume ... [qui] coincide avec une certaine vie libre 
et nue que nous avons a retrouver pour renaitre enfin" 202 ("the kingdom 
... [which] coincides with a certain free and bare life and which it is up to 
us to re-find in order for us finally to be reborn"). Her past and present drop 
away from her, as does the actuality of other beings (le poitls des etres, 
symptomatically mistranslated as "the dead weight of other people" by 
Justin O'Brien). In this passage Janine "comes to a stop at last," motionless, 
fecund, ready for communion with this piece of sky and desert, where 
(echoing Camus's explanatory note, designed as a later elucidation of the six 
stories) the woman-pied noir and colon-discovers her roots. What her real 
identity is or may be is judged later in the passage when she achieves what 
is an unmistakably sexual climax: Camus speaks here of the "centre obscur 
de son ~tre," which suggests both her own sense of obscurity and ignorance, 
and Camus's as well. Her specific history as a Frenchwoman in Algeria does 
not matter, for she has achieved a superveningly immediate and direct 
access to that particular earth and sky. 
Each of the stories in L 'Exit et le royaume (with one exception, a garrulous 
and unatfecting parable of Parisian artistic life) deals with the exile of people 
with a non-European history (four tales are set in Algeria, one each in Paris 
and in Brazil) that is deeply, even threateningly unpleasant, who are trying 
precariously to achieve a moment of rest, idyllic detachment, poetic self-CONSOLIDATED VISION 
realization. Only in "La Femme adultere" and in the story set in Brazil, 
where through sacrifice and commitment a European is received by natives 
into their circle of intimacy as a substitute for a dead native, is there any 
suggestion that Camus allowed himself to believe that Europeans might 
achieve sustained and satisfactory identification with the overseas territory. 
In "Le Renegar" a missionary is captured by an outcast southern Algerian 
tribe, has his tongue torn out (an eerie parallel with Paul Bowles's story "A 
Distant Episode"), and becomes a super-zealous partisan of the tribe, joining 
in an ambush of French forces. This is as if to say that going native dm only 
be the result of mutilation, which produces a diseased, ultimately unaccept­
able loss of identity. 
A matter of months separates this relatively late (1957) book of stories (the 
individual publication of each preceded and followed the appearance of La 
Chute in 1956) from the contents of the later pieces in Camus's Chronique.r 
alfirimne.r, published in 1958. Although passages in L 'Exil go back to the 
earlier lyricism.and controlled nostalgia of Noce.r, one of Camus's few atmo­
spheric works about life in Algeria, the stories are filled with anxiety about 
the gathering crisis. We should bear in mind that the Algerian Revolution 
was officially announced and launched on November 1, 1954; the Serif mas­
sacres by French troops of Algerian civilians had occurred in May 1945, and 
the years before that, when Camus was working on L 'Etranger, were filled 
with numerous events punctuating Algerian nationalism's long and bloody 
resistance to the French. Even though Camus grew up in Algeria as a French 
youth, according to all his biographers, he was always surrounded by the 
signs of Franco-Algerian struggle, most of which he seems to have either 
evaded or, in his last years, openly translated into the language, imagery, and 
geographical apprehension of a singular French will contesting Algeria 
against its native Muslim inhabitants. In 1957 Fram;:ois Mitterrand's book 
Pre.rence franfai.re et abandon stated flatly, "Sans Afrique, il n'y aura pas l'his-
toire de France au XXIe siecle." 203 · 
To situate Camus contrapuntally in most (as opposed to a small part) of his 
actual history, one must be alert to his true French antecedents, as well as 
the work of post-independence Algerian novelists, historians, sociologists, 
political scientists. There remains today a readily decipherable (and persis­
tent) Eurocentric tradition of interpretatively blocking off what Camus (and 
Mitterrand) blocked off about Algeria, what he and his fictional characters 
blocked off. When in the last years of his life Camus publicly and even 
vehemently opposed the nationalist demands put forward for Algerian inde­
pendence, he ~id so in the same way he had represented Algeria from the 
beginning of his artistic career, although now his words resonate depress­
ingly with the accents of official Anglo-French Suez rhetoric. His comments Camus and the French Imperial Experience 179 
about "Colonel Nasser," about Arab and Muslim imperialism, are familiar 
to us, but the one uncompromisingly severe political'statement about Alge­
ria he makes in the text appears as an unadorned political summary of his 
previous writing: 
en ce qui concerne I' Algerie, !'independence nationale est une formule 
purement passionnelle. II n'y a jamais eu encore de nation algerienne. 
LesJuifs, les Turcs, les Grecs, les Italiens, les Berberes, auraient autant 
de droit a reclamer Ia direction de cette nation virtuelle. Actuellement, 
les Arabes ne forment pas a eux seuls toute !'Algerie. L'importance et 
l'andennete du peuplement fran~ais, en paniculier, suffisent a creer un 
probleme qui ne peut se comparer a rien dans l'histoire. Les Fran~ais 
d' Algerie sont, eux aussie, et au sens fort du terme, des indigenes. II faut 
ajouter qu'une Algerie purement arabe ne pourrait acceder a !'in­
dependence economique sans laquelle !'independence politique n'est 
qu'un leurre. Si insuffisant que soit !'effort fran~ais, il est d'une telle 
envergure qu'aucun pays, a l'heure actuelle, ne consentirait a le pren­
dre, en charge." 204 
(As far as Algeria is concerned, national independence is a formula 
driven by nothing other than passion. There has never yet been an 
Algerian nation. The Jews, Turks, Greeks, Italians, or Berbers would be 
as entitled to claim the leadership of this potential nation. As things 
stand, the Arabs alone do not comprise the whole of Algeria. The size 
and duration of the French settlement, in particular, are enough to 
create a problem that cannot be compared to anything else in history. 
The French of Algeria are also natives, in the strong sense of the word. 
Moreover, a purely Arab Algeria could not achieve that economic 
independence without which political independence is nothing but an 
illusion. However inadequate the French effOrt has been, it is of such 
proportions that no other country would today agree to take over the 
responsibility.) 
The irony is that wherever in his novels or descriptive pieces Camus tells· 
a story, the French presence in Algeria is rendered either as outside narra­
tive, an essence subject to neither time nor interpretation (like Janine), or as 
the only history worth being narrated at hittory. (How different in attitude 
and tone is Pierre Bourdieu's Sociologie de I'AJgbie, also published in 19)8, 
whose analysis refutes Camus's jejune formulae and speaks forthtightly of 
colonial war as the result of l7Do societies in conflict.) Camus's obduracy 
accounts for the blankness and absence of background in the Arab killed by 
Meursault; hence also the sense of devastation in Oran that is implicitly 180 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
meant to express not mainly the Arab deaths (which, after all, are the ones 
that matter demographically) but French consciousness. 
It is accurate to say, therefore, that Camus's narratives lay severe ·and 
ontologically prior claims to Algeria's geography. For anyone who has even 
a cursory acquaintance with the extended French colonial venture there, 
these claims are as preposterously anomalous as the declaration in March 
1938 by French Minster Chautemps that Arabic was "a foreign language" in 
Algeria. They are not Camus's alone, although he gave them a semi-trans­
parent and lasting currency. He inherits and uncritically accepts them as 
conventions shaped in the long tradition of colonial writing on Algeria, 
forgotten today or unacknowledged by his readers and critics, most of whom 
find it easier to interpret his work as being about "the human condition." 
An excellent index of how many assumptions about French colonies 
Camus's readers and critics share is given in a remarkable survey of French 
schoolbooks from World War One to the period right after World War Two 
by Manuela Semidei. Her findings show a steadily mounting insistence on 
France's colonial role after World War One, the "glorious episodes" in its 
history as "a world power," as well as lyrical descriptions of France's colonial 
achievements, its establishment of peace and prosperity, the various schools 
and hospit~ls benefitting the natives, and so forth; occasional references are 
made to the use of violence, but these are overshadowed by France's won­
derful overall aim to eliminate slavery and despotism, replace them with 
peace and prosperity. North Africa figures prominently, but there is never 
any acknowledgement, according to Semidei, that the colonies might 
become independent; nationalistic movements of the 193os are "difficulties" 
rather than serious challenges. 
Semidei notes that these interwar school texts favorably contrast France's 
superior colonial rule with Britain's, suggesting that French dominions are 
ruled without the prejudice and racialism of their British counterparts. By 
the 193os this motif is endlessly repeated. When references are made to 
violence in Algeria, for example, they are couched in such a way as to render 
French forces having to take such disagreeable measures because of the 
natives' "ardeur religieuse et par l'attrait· du pillage." 20s Now, however, 
Algeria has become "a new France": prosperous, full of excellent schools, 
hospitals, and roads. Even after independence, France's colonial history is 
seen as essentially constructive, laying the foundation for "fraternal" links 
between it and its former colonies. 
Just because only one side of a contest appears relevant to a French 
audience, or because the full dynamic of colonial implantation and native 
resistance embarrassingly detracts from the attractive humanism of a major 
European tradition is no reason to go along with this-interpretative current, Camus and the French Imperial Experience 181 
or to accept the constructions and ideological images. I would go so far as 
to say that becaute Camus's most famous fiction incorporates, intransigently 
recapitulates, and in many ways depends on a massive French discourse on 
Algeria, one that belongs to the language of French imperial attitudes and 
geographical reference, his work is more, not less interesting. His clean style, 
the anguished moral dilemmas he lays bare, the harrowing personal fates of 
his characters, which he treats with such fineness and regulated irony­
all these draw on and in fact revive the history of French domination in 
Algeria, with a circumspect precision and a remarkable lack of remorse or 
compassion. 
Once again the interrelationship between geography and the political 
contest must be reanimated exactly where, in the novels, Camus covers it 
with a superstructure celebrated by Sanre as providing "a climate of the 
absurd." 206 Both L 'Etranger and La Pette are about the deaths of Arabs, deaths 
that highlight and silently inform the French characters' difficulties of con­
science and retlection. Moreover, the structure of civil society so vividly 
presented_:_the municipality, the legal apparatus, hospitals, restaurants, 
dubs, entertainments, schools-is French, although in the main it adminis­
ters the non-French population. The correspondence between how Camus 
writes about this and how the French schoolbooks do is arresting: the novels 
and shon stories narrate the result of a victory won over a pacified, deci­
mated Muslim population whose rights to the land have been severely 
curtailed. In thus confirming and consolidating French priority, Camus 
neither disputes nor dissents from the campaign for sovereignty waged 
against Algerian Muslims for over a hundred years. 
At the center of the contest is the military struggle, whose first great 
protagonists are Marshall Theodore Bugeaud and the Emir Abdel Kader, 
the one a ferocious martinet whose patriarchal severity toward the Algerian 
natives begins in 1836 as an effon at discipline and ends a decade or so later 
with a policy of genocide and massive territorial expropriation; the other is 
a Sufi mystic and relentless guerilla fighter, endlessly regrouping, reforming, 
rededicating his troops against a stronger, more modern invading enemy. To 
read the documents of the time--whether Bugeaud's letters, proclamations, 
and dispatches (compiled and published at about the same time as L 'Etran.: 
ger), or a recent edition of Abdel ~der's Sufi poetry (edited and translated 
into French by Michel Chodkiewicz), 207 or a remarkable portrait of the 
psychology of the conquest reconstructed from French diaries and letters 
of the 183os and 184os by Mostafa Lacheraf, senior member of the FLN 
and post-independence professor at the University of Algiers 208-is to per­
ceive the dynamic that makes Camus's diminishment of the Arab presence 
inevitable. CONSOLIDATED' VISION 
The core of French military policy as Bugeaud and his officers articulated 
it' was the razzia, or punitive raid on Algerians' villages, their homes, bar: 
vests, women and children. "The Arabs," said Bugeaud, "must be prevented 
from sowing, from harvesting, and from pasturing their flocks." 209 Lacheraf 
gives a sampling of the poetic exhilaration recorded time after time by the 
French officers at their work, their sense that here at last was an opportunity 
for guerre a outrance beyond all morality or need. General Changarnier, for 
instance, describes a pleasant distraction vouchsafed his troops in raiding 
peaceful villages; this type of activity is taught by the scriptures, he says, in 
which joshua and other great leaders conducted "de bien terribles razzia.r,'' 
and were blessed by God. Ruin, total destruction, um;ompromising brutality 
are condoned not only because legitimized· by God but because, in words 
echoed and re-echOed from Bugeaud to Salan,. "les Arabes ne comprennent 
que la force brutale." 21o 
.Lacheraf comments that the French. military effort in the first decades 
went well beyond its object-the suppression of Algerian resistance-and 
attained the absolute status of an ideal.211 Its other side, as expressed with 
tireless zeal by Bugeaud himself, was colonization. Toward the end of his 
stay in Algeria, he is constandy exasperated by the way in which European 
civilian emigrants are using up the resources of Algeria without restraint or 
reason; leave colonization to the military, he writes in his letters, but to no 
avail,ZIZ 
As it happens, one of the quiet themes running through French fiction 
from Balzac to Psichari and Loti is precisely this abuse of Algeria and the 
scandals deriving from shady financial schemes operated by unscrupulous 
individuals for whom the openness of. the place permitted nearly every 
conceivable thing to be done if profit could be promised or expected. 
Unforgettable . portraits of this state of affairs can be found in Daudet's 
Tartarin de Tanm:on and Maupassant's Bel-Ami (both of which are referred 
to in Martine Loutfi's perspicacious Littirature et colonialif111e). 213 
The destruction wrought upon Algeria by the French was systematic on 
the .one hand, and constitutive of a new French polity on the other. About 
this no contemporary witness between 184o and 187o was in doubt. Some, like 
Tocqueville, who sternly criticized American policy toward Blacks and 
native Indians, believed that the advance of European civilization neces­
sitated inflicting cruelties on the Muslim indigenes: in his view, total conquest 
became equivalent to French greatness. He considered Islam synonymous 
with "polygamy, the isolation of women, the absence of all political life, a 
tyrannical and omnipresent government which forces men to conceal them­
selves and to seek all their satisfactions in family life."214 And because he 
thought the natives were nomadic, he believed "that all means of desolating Camu.r and the French Imperial Experience 
these tribes ought to be used. I make an exception only in case of what is 
interdicted by international law and that of humanity." But, as Melvin 
Richter comments, Tocqueville said nothing "in 1846 when it was revealed 
that hundreds of Arabs had been smoked to death in the course of the rr~zziar 
he had approved for their humane quality." 215 "Unfortunate necessities," 
Tocqueville thought, but nowhere near as important as the "good govern­
ment" owed the "half-civili;zed" Muslims by French government. 
To today's leading North African historian, Abdullah Laroui, French 
colonial policy intended nothing less than to destroy the Algerian state, such 
as it was. Clearly Camus's declaration that an Algerian nation never existed 
presumed that the ravages of French policy had wiped the slate clean. 
Nevertheless, as I have been saying, post-colonial events impose upon us 
both a longer narrative and a more inclusive and demystifying interprets~ 
tion. Laroui says: 
The history of Algeria from 183o to 187o is made up of pretenses: the 
colons who allegedly wished to transform the Algerians into men like 
themselves, when in reality their only desire was to transform the soil 
of Algeria into French soil; the military, who supposedly respected the 
local traditions and way of life, whereas in reality their only interest 
was to govern with the least possible etfort; the claim of Napoleon III 
that he was building an Arab kingdom, whereas his central ideas were 
the "Americanization" of the French economy and the French coloni­
zation of Algeria.216 
When he arrives in. Algeria in 187:t, Daudet's Tartarin sees few traces of"the 
Orient" that had been promised him, and finds himself instead in an overseas 
copy of his native Tarascon. For writers like Segalen and Gide, Algeria is 
an exotic locale in which their own spiritual problems--like J anine's-can 
be addressed. and therapeutically treated. Scant attention is paid to the 
natives, whose purpose is routinely to provide transient thrills or opportuni­
ties for exercises of will-not only Michel in L 1mmoralirte but also Malraux's 
protagonist Perken in the Cambodian setting of LaVoie royale. Differences in 
French representations of Algeria, whether they are the crude harem post­
cards studied so memorably by Malek Alloula, 217 or the sophisticated .an­
thropological constructions unearthed by Fanny Colonna and Claude 
Brahimi, 218 or the impressive narrative structures of which Camus's works 
furnish so impottant an example, can all be traced back to the geographical 
morte-main of French colonial practice. 
How deeply felt, consistently replenished, incorporated, and institution­
alized an enterprise is French discourse we can further.discover in early-CONSOLIDATED VISION 
twentieth-cenmry works of geography and colonial thought. Albert Sarraut's 
Grandeur et .rervitude coloniale.r states no less a goal for colonialism than the 
biological unity of mankind, "Ia solidarite humaine." Races incapable of 
utilizing their resources (e.g., natives in France's overseas territories) are. to 
be brought back to the human family; "c'est Ia pour le colonisateur, Ia 
contre-partie formelle de Ia prise de possession; elle enleve a son acte le 
caractere de spoliation; elle en fait une creation de droit humain" 219 ("Here, 
for the colonizer, is the formal counterpart of the act of possession; it 
removes from the act its character of plunder and makes it a creation of 
human law"). In his classic La Politi'que coloniale et Je partage du terre aux X/Xe 
et XXe .riecle.r, Georges Hardy venmres to argue that the assimilation· of 
colonies to France "a fait jaillir des sources d'inspiration et non seulemcmt 
provoque I' apparition d'innombrables romans coloniaux, mais encore ouvert 
les esprits a Ia diversite des formes morales et mentales, incite les ecrivains 
a des genres ineditS d'exploration psychologique"ZZO ("caused inspiration tO 
burst forth and not only led to the appearance of numerous·colonial novels 
but also opened minds to the diversity of moral and mental forms, encourag­
ing writers to adopt new modes of psychological exploration"). Hardy's book 
was published in 1937; Rector of the Academy of Algiers, he was also honor­
ary director of the Eoole Coloniale and, in his uncannily declarative phrases, 
an immediate forerunner of Camus. 
Camus's novels and stories thus very precisely distill the traditions, idi­
oms, and discursive strategies of France's appropriation of Algeria. He gives 
its most exquisite articulation, its final evolution to this massive "strucmre 
of feeling." But to discern this strucmre, we must consider Camus's works 
as a metropolitan transfiguration of the colonial dilemma: they represent the 
colon writing for a French audience whose personal history is tied irrevoca­
bly to this southern department of France; a history taking place anywhere 
else is unintelligible. Yet the ceremonies of bonding with the territory­
enacted by Meursault in Algiers, Tarrou and Rieux enfolded within the 
walls ofOran,Janine during a Saharan vigil-ironically stimulate queries in 
the reader about the need for such affirmations. When the violence of the 
French past is thus inadvertently recalled, these ceremonies become fore­
shortened, highly compressed commemorations of survival, that of a com­
munity with nowhere to go. 
Meursault's predicament is more radical than the others'. For even if we 
assume that the falsely constimted law court (as Conor Cruise O'Brien 
rightly says, a most unlikely place to try a Frenchman for killing an Arab) 
has a continuing existence, Meursault himself understands the finality; at last 
he can experience relief and defiance together: 'J'avais eu raison, j'avais 
encore raison, j'avais toujours raison.J'avais vecu de telle fa~on et j'aurais pu Camus and the French Imperial Experience x8s 
vivre de telle autre.J'avais fait ceci et je n'avais pas fait cela.Je n'avais pas 
fait cette autre. Et apres? C'etait comme si j'avais attendu pendant tout le 
temps cette minute et cette petite aube ou je serais justifie." 221 ("I had been 
right. I was again right, I was still right. I had lived like this and could have 
lived like that. I had done this and had not done that. I had not done that 
other thing. And so? It was as ifl had all along been waiting for this moment 
and this daybreak when I would be vindicated.") 
There are no choices left here, no alternatives, no humane substitutes. 
The co/bn embodies both the real human effort his community contributed 
and the obstacle of refusing to give up a systematically unjust political 
system. The deeply conflicted strength ofMeursault's suicidal self-acknowl­
edgement can have emerged only out of that specific history and in that 
specific community. At the end, he accepts what he is and yet also under­
stands why his mother, confined to an old persons' home, has decided to 
remarry: "elle avait joue a recommencer .... Si pres de Ia mort, maman devait 
s'y sentir libre et pr~e a tout revivre." 222 ("She had played at starting again . 
. . . So close to death, Mother had to feel free and ready to live everything 
again.") We have done what we have done here, and so let us do it again. 
This tragically unsentimental obduracy turns into the unflinching human 
capacity for renewed generation and regeneration. Camus's readers have 
imputed to L 'Etranger the universality of a liberated existential humanity 
facing cosmic indifference and human cruelty with impudent stoicism. 
To resituate L 'Etrangerin the geographical nexus from which its narrative 
trajectory emerges is to interpret it as a heightened form of historical 
experience. Like Orwell's work and status in England, Camus's plain style 
and unadorned reporting of social situations conceal rivetingly complex 
contradictions, contradiCtions unresolvable by rendering, as critics have 
done, his feelings of loyalty to French Algeria as a parable of the human 
condition. This is what his social and literary reputation still depends on. Yet 
beca~se there was always the more difficult and challenging alternative of 
first judging, then refusing France's territorial seizure and political sover­
eignty, blocking as it did a compassionate, shared understanding of Algerian 
nationalism, Camus's limitations seem unacceptably paralyzing. Counter­
poised with the decolonizing literature of the time, whether French or 
Arab---Germaine Tillion, Kateb Yacine, Fanon, or Genet-camus's narra­
tives have a negative vitality, in which the tragic human seriousness ofi:he 
colonial effort achieves its last great clarification before ruin overtakes it. 
They express a waste and sadness we have still not completely understood 
or recovered from. 186 CONSOLIIJATED VISION 
( VIII ) 
A Note on Modernism 
N 0 vision, any more than any social system, has total hegemony over 
its domain. In studying cultural texts that happily co-existed with or 
lent support to the global enterprises ofEuropean and American empire, one 
is not indicting them wholesale or suggesting that they are less interesting 
as art for being in complex ways part of the imperialist undertaking. My 
account here speaks of largely unopposed and undeterred will to overseas 
dominion, not of a completely unopposed one. We ought to be impressed with 
how, by the end of the nineteenth century, colonial lobbies in Europe, for 
instance, could whether by cabal or by popular support press the nation into 
more scrambling for land and more natives being compelled into imperial 
service, with little at horne to stop or inhibit the process. Yet there are always 
resistances, however ineffective. Imperialism not only is a relationship of 
domination but also is committed to a specific ideology of expansion; as 
Seeley to his credit recognized, expansion was more than an inclination, "it 
is evidently the great fact of modem English history."m Admiral Mahan in 
the United States and Leroy-Beaulieu in France made similar claims. And 
expansion could occur with such stunning results only because there was 
power-power military, economic, political, and cultural-enough for the 
task in Europe and America. 
Once the basic fact of European and Western control over the non­
Western world was taken as fact, as inevitable, much complex and, 1 would 
add, antinomian cultural discussion began to occur with noticeably greater 
frequency. This did not immediately disturb the sense of sovereign perma­
nence and irreversible presence, but it did lead to an extremely important 
mode of cultural practice in Western society, which played an interesting 
part in the development of anti-imperialist resistance in the colonies. 
Readers of Alben 0., Hirschman's The Passions and the Interests will recall 
that he describes the intellectual debate accompanying European economic 
expansion as proceeding from-and then consolidating-the argument that 
human passion should give way to interests as a method for governing the 
world. When this argument had triumphed, by the late eighteenth century, 
it became a target of opportunity for those Romantics who saw in an 
interest-centered world a symbol for the dull, uninteresting, and selfish 
situation they had inherited from prior generations.m A Note on Modernism 
Let us extend Hirschman's method to the question of imperialism .. By the 
late nineteenth century England's empire was pre-eminent in the world and 
the cultural argument for empire was triumphing. The empire was a real 
thing, after all, and, as Seeley told his audience, "We in Europe ... are pretty 
well agreed that the treasure of truth which forms the nucleus of ·the 
civilization of the West is incomparably more sterling not only than the 
Brahmanic mysticism with which it has to contend, but even than the Roman 
enlightenment which the old Empire transmitted to the nations of 
Europe."zzs 
At the center of this remarkably confident statement are two somewhat 
recalcitrant realities that Seeley deftly incorporates and also dismisses: one 
is the contending native (the Brahmanic mystic himself), the second is the 
existence of other empires, past as well as present. In both, Seeley .allusively 
records the paradoxical consequences of imperialism's triumphs and then 
passes on to other subjects. For once imperialism, like the doctrine of 
interests, had become the settled norm in political ideas about Europe's 
world-wide destiny, then, ironically, the allure of its opponents, the intransi­
gence of its subjugated classes, the resistance to its irresistible sway were 
clarified and heightened. Seeley deals with these matters as a realist, not as 
a p~t who might wish to make of the one a noble or romantic presence, or 
of the other a base and immoral competitor. Nor does he attempt a revision­
ist account in the manner of Hobson (whose book on imperialism is a 
dissenting counterpart). 
Let me now jump abruptly back to the realistic novel with. which J.have 
been much concerned in this chapter. Its central theme by the late nine­
teenth century was disenchantment, or what Lukacs called ironic disillusion. 
Tragically or sometimes comically blocked protagonists are brusquely and 
often rudely awakened by the novel's action to the discrepancy between 
their illusory expectations and the social realities. Hardy's Jude, George 
Eliot's Dorothea, Flaubert's Frederic, Zola's Nana, Butler's Ernest, James's 
Isabel, Gissing's Reardon, Meredith's Feverel-the list is very long. Into this 
narrative ofloss and disablement is gradually inte~ected an alternative--not 
only the novel of frank exoticism and confident empire, but travel narratives, 
works of colonial exploration and scholarship, memoirs, _experience and 
expertise. In Dr. Livingstone's personal narratives and Haggard's She, Kip­
ling's Raj, Loti's Le Roman d'un Spahi, and most of Jules Verne's adventures, 
we discern a new narrative progression and triumphalism. Almost without 
exception these narratives, and literally hundreds like them based on the 
exhilaration and interest of adventure in the colonial world, far from casting 
doubt on the imperial undertaking, serve to confirm and celebrate its suc­
cess. Explorers find what they are looking for, adventurers rerum home safe 188 CONSOLIDATED VISION 
and wealthier, and even the chastened Kim is drafted into the Great Game. 
As against this optimism, affirmation, and serene confidence, Conrad's 
narratives--to which I have so often referred because more than anyone 
else he tackled the subtle cultural reinforcements and manifestations of 
empire:--radiate an extreme, unsettling anxiety: they react to the triumph 
of empire the way Hirschman says that romantics responded to the tri­
umph of an interest-centered view of the world. Conrad's tales and novels 
in one sense reproduce the aggressive contours of the high imperialist under­
taking, but in another sense they are infected with the easily recognizable, 
ironic awareness of the post-realist modernist sensibility. Conrad, Forster, 
Malraux, T. E. Lawrence take narrative from the triumphalist experience 
of imperialism into the extremes of self-consciousness, discontinuity, self­
referentiality, and corrosive irony, whose formal patterns we have ~ome to 
recognize as the hallmarks of modernist culture, a culture that also embraces 
the major work of Joyce, T. S. Eliot, Proust, Mann, and Yeats. I would like 
to suggest that many of the most prominent characteristics of modernist 
culture, which we have tended to derive from purely internal dynamics in 
Western society and culture, include a response to the external p~essures on 
culture from the imperium. Certainly this is true of Conrad's entire oeuvre, and 
it is also true of Forster's, T. E. Lawrence's, Malraux's; in dilferent ways, the 
impingements of empire on an Irish sensibility are registered in Yeats and 
Joyce, those on American expatriates in the work of Eliot and Pound. 
In Mann's great fable of the alliance between creativity and disease-­
Death in Venice-the plague that infects Europe is Asiatic in origin; the 
combination of dread and promise, of degeneration and desire, so elfecti.vely 
rendered by Aschenbach's psychology is Mann's way of suggesting, I be­
lieve, that Europe, its art, mind, monuments, is no longer invulnerable, no 
longer able to ignore its ties to its overseas domains. Similarly Joyce, for 
whom the Irish nationalist and intellectual Stephen Dedalus is ironically 
fortified not by Irish Catholic comrades but by the wandering Jew Leopold 
Bloom, whose. exoticism and cosmopolitan skills undercut the morbid so­
lemnity of Stephen's rebellion. Like the fascinating inverts ofProust's novel, 
Bloom testifies to a new presence within Europe, a presence rather strikingly 
described in terms unmistakably taken from the exotic annals of overseas 
discovery, conquest, vision. Only now instead of being out there, they are here, 
as troubling as the primitive rhythms of the Sacre du printemps or the African 
icons in Picasso's art. 
The formal dislocations and displacements in modernist culture, and most 
strikingly its pervasive irony, are influenced by precisely those two disturb­
ing factors Seeley mentions as a consequence of imperialism: the contending A Note ~ Modernism 
native and the fact of other empires. Along with "the old men" who ruin and 
hijack his great adventure, Lawrence's Arabs in The Sewn Pillars of Wisdqm 
require his sad and dissati1jfied acknowledgement, just as imperial France 
and Turkey P,o; in A Passage to India, it is Forster's great achievement to show 
with remarkable precision (and discomfort) how the moral drama of con­
temporary Indian mysticism and nationalism---Godbole and Aziz-unfolds 
against the older clash between the British and Mogul empires. In Loti's 
L 1nde (sans les Anglais) we read a travel narrative based on a journey across 
India in which the ruling English are deliberately, even spitefully, not once 
mentioned, 226 as if to suggest that only the natives are to be seen, whereas 
of course India was an exclusively British (and certainly not a French) 
possession. 
I venture the suggestion that when European culture finally began to take 
due account of imperial "delusions and discoveries"-in Benita Parry's fine 
phrase for the Anglo-Indian cultural encounter 227-it did so not opposition­
ally but ironically, and with a desperate attempt at a new inclusiveness. It 
was as if having for centuries comprehended empire as a fact of national 
destiny to be either taken for granted or celebrated, consolidated, and 
enhanced, members of the dominant European cultures now began to look 
abroad with the skepticism and confusion of people surprised, perhaps even 
·shocked by what they saw. Cultural texts imported the foreign into Europe 
in ways that very clearly bear the mark of the imperial enterprise, of 
explorers and ethnographers, geologists and geographers, merchants and 
soldiers. At first they stimulated the interest of European audiences; by the 
beginning of the twentieth century, they were used to convey an ironic sense 
of how vulnerable Europe was, and how-in Conrad's great phrase-"this 
also has been.one of the dark places on the earth." 
To deal with this, a new encyclopedic form became necessary, one that 
had three distinctive features. First was a circularity of structure, inclusive 
and open at the same rime: Ulysses, Heart ofDarRness, A Ja recherche, The Waste 
Land, Cantos, To the Lighthouse. Second was a novelty based almost entirely 
on the reformulation of old, even outdated fragments drawn self-consciously 
from disparate locations, sources, cultures: the hallmark of modernist form 
is the strange juxtaposition of comic and tragic, high and low, commonplace 
and exotic, familiar and alien whose most ingenious resolution is Joyce's 
fusing of the Odyssey with the Wandering Jew, advertising and Virgil (or 
Dante), perfect symmetry and the salesman's catalogue. Third is the irony 
of a form that draws attention to itself as substituting art and its creations for 
the once-possible synthesis of the world empires. When you can no longer 
assume that Britannia will rule the waves forever, you have to reconceive CONSOLIDATED VISION 
reality as something that can be held together by you the artist, in history 
rather than in geography. Spatiality becomes, ironically, the characteristic of 
an aesthetic rather than of political domination, as more and more regions---"­
from India to Africa to the Caribbean--challenge the classical empires and 
their cultures. CHAPTER THREE 
RESISTANCE AND 
OPPOSITION 
lie rnoi de tes vastes bras a I'argile lurnineuse 
AIME CtsAIRE, C.bier d'un retour 11u jJIIYJ ntJtlll 
( I ) 
There Are Two Sides 
A standard topic in the history of ideas and the study of cultures is that 
constellation of relationships that can be collected under the general 
heading of "influence." I began this book by invoking Eliot's famous essay 
"Tradition and the Individual Talent" as a way of introducing the matt~r of 
influence in its most basic, even abstract form: the· connection between the 
present and the pastness (or not) of the past, a connection which as Eliot 
discusses it includes the relationship between an individual writer and the 
tradition of which he or she is a part. I suggested that studying the relation­
ship between the "West" and its dominated cultural "others" is not just a 
way ofunderstanding an unequal relationship between unequal interlocu­
tors, but also a point of entry into studying the formation and meaning of 
Western cultural practices themselves. And the persistent disparity in power 
between the West and non-West must be taken into account if we are 
accurately to understand cultural forms like that of the novel, of ethno­
graphic and historical discourse, cenai~ kinds of poetry and opera, where 
allusions to and structures based on this disparity abound. I went on to argue 
that when supposedly otherwise neutral depanments of culture like litera­
ture and critical theory converge upon the weaker or subordinate culture 
and interpret it with ideas of unchanging non-European and European 
essences, narratives about geographical possession, and images oflegitimacy 
and redemption, the striking consequence has been to disguise the power RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
situation and to conceal how much the experience of the stronger party 
overlaps with and, strangely, depends on the weaker. 
An instance of this is found in Gide's L 1mmoraliste (1902.), usually read as 
the story of a man who comes to terms with his eccentric sexuality by 
allowing it· to strip him not only of his wife, Marceline, and career, but 
paradoxically of his will. Michel is a philologist whose academic research 
into Europe's barbarian past reveals to him his own suppressed instincts, 
longings, proclivities. As with Thomas Mann's Death in· Venice, the setting is 
representative of an exotic locale at or just beyond the boundaries ofEurope; 
a major locale for the action of L 1mmoraliste is French Algeria, a place of 
deserts, languorous oases, amoral native boys and girls. Michel's Nietzchean 
mentor, Menalque, is straightforwardly described as a colonial official, and 
although he is straight out of an imperial world recognizable to readers of 
T. E. Lawrence or Malraux, his sybaritic and epicurean presenc;e is quite 
Gidean. Menalque (more than Michel) derives knowledge and also pleasure 
from his life of"obscure expeditions," sensual indulgence, and anti-domestic 
freedom. "La vie, le moindre geste de Menalque," reflects Michel, as he 
compares his course of academic lectures with the flamboyant imperialist, 
"n'etait-il pas plus eloqtient mille fois que mon cours?" 1 
What first connects the two men, however, is neither ideas nor life 
histories but the confessions ofMoktir, a native boy in Biskra (to which Gide 
returned in book after book), who tells Menalque how he watched Michel 
spying on him in the act of stealing Marceline's scissors. The homosexual 
complicity among the three is an unmistakably hierarchical relationship: 
Moktir, the African boy, gives a surreptitious thrill to Michel, his employer, 
which in turn is a step along the way to his self-knowledge, in which 
Menalque's superior insights guide him. What Moktir thinks or feels (which 
seems congenitally, if not also racially, mischievous) is far less important 
than what Michel and Menalque make of the experience. Gide explicitly 
connects Michel's self-knowledge with his experiences of Algeria, which are 
causally related to the death of his wife, his intellectual reorientation, and 
his final, rather pathetic bisexual forlornness. 
Speaking of French North Africa-it is Tunisia he has in mind-Michel 
offers the following aperfus: 
This land of pleasure satisfies without calming desire; indeed, every 
satisfaction merely exalts it. 
A land liberated from works of an. I despise those who can acknowl­
edge beauty only when it's already transcribed, interpreted. One thing 
admirable about the Arabs: they live their art, they sing and scatter it 
from day to day; they don't cling to it, they don't enbalm it in works. There Are Two Sides 193 
Which is the cause and the ~ffect of the absence of great artists .... Just 
as I was returning to the hofel, I remembered a group of Arabs I had 
noticed lying in the open air on the mats of a little cafe. I went and slept 
among them. I returned covered with vermin.z 
The people of Africa, and especially those Arabs, are just there; they have 
no accumulating art or history that is sedimented into works. Were it not for 
the European observer who attests to its existence, it would not matter. To 
be among those people is pleasurable, but one needs to accept its risks (the 
verniin, for example). 
L Tmmoraliste has an additionally problematic dimension in that its first­
person narration-Michel tells his own story-heavily depends on a num­
ber of inclusions he makes: through him come the North Africans, come his 
wife and Menalque. Michel is a prosperous Normandy landowner, a scholar, 
and a Protestant--suggesting that Gide intends multiple sides of personal­
ity, able to negotiate th~ travails of both selfhood and worldliness. All of 
these aspects in the final analysis depend on what Michel discovers about 
himself in Africa, yet his self-discovery is limited by transitoriness and 
transparency, and unvalued. Once again, the narrative has a "structure of 
attitude and reference" that entides the European authorial subject to hold 
on to an overseas territory, derive benefits from it, depend on it, but ulti­
mately refuse it autonomy or independence. 
Gide is a special case--treating in his North African works relatively 
restricted material: Islamic, Arab, homosexual But although the instance of 
a highly individualistic artist, Gide's relationship to Africa belongs to a 
larger formation of European attitudes and practices toward the continent, 
out of which emerged what late-twentieth-century critics have called Afri­
canism, or Africanist discourse, a systematic language for dealing with and 
srudying Africa for the West. 3 Conceptions of primitivism are associated 
with it, as well as concepts deriving a special epistemological privilege from 
the African provenance, such as tribalism, vitalism, originality. We can see 
these obligingly serviceable concepts at work in Conrad and Isak Dinesen, 
as well as, later, in the audacious scholarship of Leo Frobenius, the German 
anthropologist who claimed to have discovered the perfect order of the 
African system, and Placide Tempels, the Belgian missionary whose book 
Bantu Pbilorophy proposed an essentialist (and reductive) vitality at the heart 
of African philosophy. So productive and adaptable was this notion of 
African identity that it could be used by Western missionaries, then an­
thropologists, then Marxist historians, then, antagonistically, even liberation 
movements, as V. Y. Mudimbe has shown in his remarkable The Invention of 
Africa (1988), the history of what he calls an African gnosis.4 194 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
The general cultural situation obtaining between the West and its over­
seas imperium until the modem period, especially the period around World 
War One, conformed to this kind of pattern. Since my enormous topic can 
best be dealt with at this stage by alternating general with very specific and 
local studies, my purpose here is to sketch the interacting experience that 
links imperializers with the imperialized. The study of the relationship 
between culture and imperialism at this quite early stage of development 
needs neither simple chronological nor simple anecdotal narrative (a fair 
number of these already exist in separate fields), but an attempt at a global­
ized (not total) description. And of course any study of the connection 
between culture and empire is itself an integral part of the topic, part of what 
George Eliot in another connection called the same embroiled medium­
rather than a discourse written from a distant, and disengaged perspective. 
The emergence of almost a hundred new decolonized post-colonial states 
after 1945 is not a neutral fact, but one to which, in discussions of it, scholars, 
historians, activists have been either for or against. 
Exactly as in its triumphant period imperialism tended to license only a 
cultural discourse that was formulated from within it, today post-imperial­
ism has permitted mainly a cultural discourse of suspicion on the part of 
formerly colonized peoples, and of theoretical avoidance at most on the part 
of metropolitan intellectuals. I find myself caught between the two, as many 
of us are who were brought up during the period when the classical colonial 
empires were dismantled. We belong to the period both of colonialism and 
of resistance to it; yet we also belong to a period of surpassing theoretical 
elaboration, of the universalizing techniques of deconstruction, structural­
ism, and Lukacsian and Althusserian Marxism. My homemade resolution of 
the antitheses between involvement and theory has been a broad perspective 
from which one could view both culture and imperialism and from which 
the large historical dialectic between one and the other might be observed 
even though its myriad details cannot be except occasionally. I shall proceed 
on the assumption that whereas the whole of a culture is a disjunct one, 
many important sectors of it can be apprehended as working contrapuntally 
together. 
Here I am especially concerned with the extraordinary, almost Coperni­
can change in the relationship between Western. culture and the empire 
during the early years of this century. It is useful to see this change as similar 
in scope and significance to two earlier ones: the rediscovery of Greece 
during the humanistic period of the European Renaissance; and the "Orien­
tal Renaissance"-so called by its great modern historian Raymond 
SchwabS-from the late eighteenth to the middle nineteenth century, when 
the cultural riches of India, China, Japan, Persia, and Islam were firmly There Are Two Sider 195 
deposited at the bean of European culture. The second, what Schwab calls 
Europe's magnificent appropriation of the Orient-the discoveries of San­
skrit by German and ~rench grammarians, of the great Indian national epics 
by English, German, and French poets and artists, of Persian imagery and 
Sufi philosophy by many European and even American thinkers from Goe­
the to Emerson-was one of the most splendid episodes in the history of the 
human adventure, and a subject sufficient unto itsel£ 
The missing dimension in Schwab's narrative is the political one, much 
sad4er and less edifying than the cultural one. As I have argued in Oriental­
inn, the net effect of cultural exchange between partners conscious of in­
equality is that the people suffer. The Greek classics served the Italian, 
French, and English humanists without the troublesome interposition of 
actual Greeks. Texts by dead people were read, appreciated, and 'appro­
priated by people who imagined an ideal commonwealth. This is one. reason 
that scholars rarely speak suspicioutly or disparagingly of the Renaissance. 
In modem times, however, thinking about cultural exchange involves think­
ing about domination and forcible appropriation: someone loses, someone 
gains. Today, for example, discussions of American history are increasingly 
interrogations of that history for what it did to native peoples, immigrant 
populations,' oppressed minorities. 
But only recently have Westerners become aware that what they have to 
say about the history and the cultures of"subordinate" peoples is challenge­
able by the people themselves, people who a few years back were simply 
incorporated, culture, land, history, and all, into the great Western empires, 
and their disciplinary discourses. (This is not to denigrate the accomplish­
ments of many Western scholars, historians, anists, philosophers, musicians, 
and missionari.es, whose corporate and individual efforts in making known 
the world beyond Europe are a stunning achievement.) 
An immense wave of anti-colonial and ultimately anti-imperial activity, 
thought, and revision has overtaken the massive edifice of Western empire, 
challenging it, to use Gramsci's vivid metaphor, in a mutual siege. For the 
first time W estemers have been required to confront themselves not simply 
as the Raj but as representatives of a culture and even of races accused of 
crimes--crimes of violence, crimes of suppression, crimes of conscience. 
"Today," says Fanon in The Wretched of the Earth (1961), "the Third World 
... faces Europe like a colossal mass whose aim should be to try to resolve 
the pr~blems to which Europe has not been able to find the answers." 6 Such 
accusations had of course been made before, even by such intrepid Euro­
peans as Samuel johnson and W. S. Blunt. Right across the non-European 
world there had been earlier colonial uprisings, from the San Domingo 
revolution and the Abdul Kader insurrection to the 1857 Rebellion, the Orabi RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
Revolt, and the Boxer Rebellion. There had been reprisals, changes of 
regime, causes celebres, debates, reforms, and reappraisals. All along, though, 
the empires increased in size and profit. The new sitUation was a sustained 
confrontation of, and systematic resistance to, the Empire as West. Long­
simmering resentments against the white man from the Pacific to the Atlan­
tic sprang into fully ftedged independence movements. Pan-African and 
Pan-Asian militants emerged who could not be stopped. 
The militant groups between the two world wars were not clearly or 
completely anti-West. Some believed that relief from colonialism could 
come by working with Christianity; others believed that westernization was 
the solution. In Africa these between-the-wars efforts were represented, 
according to Basil Davidson, by such people as Herbert Macaulay, Leopold 
Senghor,]. H. Casely Hayford, Samuel Ahuma;? in the Arab world during 
. this period Saad Zaghloul, Nuri as-Said, Bishara al-Khoury were counter­
pans. Even later revolutionary leadePs--Ho Chi Minh in .Vietnam, for 
example-originally held the view that aspects of Western culture could be 
helpful in ending colonialism. But their efforts and ideas received little 
response in the metropole, and in time their resistance was transformed. 
For if colonialism was a system, as Sartre was to say in one of his post-war 
essays, then resistance began to feel systematic too.8 Someone like Sartre 
could say, in the opening sentences of his preface to Fanon's The Wretched 
of the Eart,h (1961), that the world was really two warring factions, "five 
hundred million men and one thousand five hundred million natives. The 
former had the Word; the others had the use of it .... In the colonies the truth 
stood naked, but the citizens of the mother country preferred it with clothes 
on."9 Davidson puts the case for the new African response with his usual 
eloquent perspicacity: 
History ... is not a calculating machine. It unfolds in the mind and the 
imagination and takes body in the multifarious responses of a people's 
culture itself the infinitely subtle mediation of material realities, of 
underpinning economic facts, of gritty objectivities. African cultural 
responses after 1945 were as varied as one might expect from so many 
peoples and perceived interests. But they were above all inspired by a 
vivid hope of change, scarcely present before, certainly never before 
felt with any such intensity or wide appeal; and they were spoken by 
men and women whose hearts beat to a brave music. These were the 
responses that moved African history into a new course. 10 
The sense for Europeans of a tremendous and disorienting change in 
perspective in the West-non-West relationship was entirely new, experi-There Are Two Sides 197 
enced neither in the European Renaissance nor in the "discovery" of the 
Orient three centuries later. Think of the differences between Poliziano's 
recovery and editing of Greek classics in the 146os, or Bopp and Schlegel 
reading Sanskrit grammarians in the r8ros, and a French political theorist or 
Orientalist reading Fanon during the Algerian War in 1961, or Cesaire's 
Ditcours sur le colonialitme when it appeared in 1955 just after the French 
defeat at Dien Bien Phu. Not only is this last unfortunate fellow addressed 
by natives while his army is engaged by them, as neither of his predecessors 
were, but he is reading a text in the language ofBossuet and Chateaubriand, 
using concepts of Hegel, Marx, and Freud to incriminate the very civiliza­
tion producing all of them. Fanon goes still funher when he reverses the 
hitheno accepted paradigm by which Europe gave the colonies their moder­
nity and argues instead that not only were "the well-being and the progress 
of Europe ... built up with the sweat and the dead bodies of Negroes, Arabs, 
Indians, and the yellow races" 1 1 but "Europe is literally the creation of the 
Third 'World," 1z a charge to be made again and again by Walter Rodney, 
Chinweizu, and others. Concluding this preposterous reordering of things, 
we find Same echoing Fanon (instead of the other way around) when he 
says, "There is nothing more consistent than a racist humanism, since the 
Europeafii has only been able to become a man through creating slaves and 
monsters." 13 
World War One did nothing to lessen the Western hold on colonial 
territories, because the West needed those territories to furnish Europe with 
manpower and resources for a war of little direct concern for Africans and 
Asians. 14 Yet the processes that resulted in independence after World War 
Two were already under way. The question of dating the resistance to 
imperialism in subject territories is crucial to both sides in how imperialism 
is seen. For the successful nationalist panies that led the struggle against the 
European powers, legitimacy and cultural primacy depend on their assening 
an unbroken continuity leading to the first warriors who stood a'gainst the 
intrusive white man. Thus the Algerian National Liberation Front which 
inaugurated its insurrection. against France in 1954 traced its ancestry to the 
Emir Abdel Kader, who fought the French occupation during the 183os and 
18408. In Guinea and Mali resistance against the French -is traced back 
generations to Samory and Hajji Omar. 1s But only occasionally did scribes 
of empire recognize the validity of these resistances; as we saw in our 
discussion of Kipling, numerous attenuating rationalizations of the native 
presence ("they" were really happy until roused by troublemakers, for 
example) were preferred to the rather more simple reason for dissatisfaction, 
that the natives wished for relief from the European presence in their land. 
The debate continues until today among historians in Europe and the RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
United States. Were those early "prophets of rebellion," as Michael Adas has 
called them, backward-looking, romantic, and unrealistic people who acted 
negatively against the "modernizing" Europeans, 16 or are we to take seri­
ously the statements of their modern heirs-for example,Julius Nyerere and 
Nelson Mandela-as to the continuing significance of their early, usually 
doomed efforts? Terence Ranger has shown that these are matters not simply 
of academic speculation, but of urgent political moment. Many of the resis­
tance movements, for instance, "shaped the environment in which later 
politics developed; ... resistance had profound effects upon white poliCies 
and attitudes; ... during the course of the resistances, or some of them, types 
of political organization or inspiration emerged which looked in imponant 
ways to the future; which in some cases are directly and in others indirectly 
linked with later manifestations of African opposition [to European imperi­
alism]."17 Ranger demonstrates that the intellectual and moral battle over 
the continuity and coherence of nationalist resistance to impe~;ialism went 
on for dozens of years, and became an organic pan of the irpperial experi­
ence. If, as an African or Arab, you choose to remember the Ndebele-Shona 
and Orabi uprisings of 1896--97 and 1882, respectively, you honor nationalist 
leaderships whose failures enabled later success; it is likely that Europeans 
will interpret these uprisings more disparagingly, as the work of cliques, or 
of crazy millenarians, and so fonh. 
Then, stunningly, by and large the entire world was decolonized after 
World War Two. Grimal's study includes a map of the British empire at its 
height: it is compelling evidence both of how vast its possessions were and 
of how more or less completely it lost them in a matter of years after war's 
end in 1945. John Strachey's well-known book The End of Empire (1959), 
commemorates the loss definitively. From London, British statesmen, sol­
diers, merchants, scholars, educators, missionaries, bureaucrats, and spies 
had decisive responsibility for Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, New 
Guinea, Ceylon, Malaya, all of the Asian subcontinent, most of the Middle 
East, all of East Africa from Egypt to South Africa, a big chunk of Central 
West Africa (including Nigeria), Guiana, some of the Caribbean islands, 
Ireland, and Canada. 
Decidedly smaller than Britain's, France's empire comprised a mass of 
islands in the Pacific and Indian oceans as well as the Caribbean (Madagas­
car, New Caledonia, Tahiti, Guadeloupe, etc.), Guiana, and all oflndochina 
(Annan,· Cambodia, Cochin China, Laos, and Tonkin); in Africa, France 
seriously vied with Britain for supremacy-most of the western half of the 
continent from the Mediterranean to the Equator was in French hands, as 
well as French Somaliland. In addition, there were Syria and Lebanon, 
. which, like so many of France's African and Asian colonies, encroached on There Are Two Sides 199 
British routes and territories. Lord Cromer, one of the most famously re­
doubtable of British imperial proconsuls (as he once rather haughtily put it, 
"We do not govern Egypt, we only govern the governors ofEgypt"),l 8 who 
had distinguished service in India before he ruled Egypt almost single­
handedly between 1883 and 1907, often spoke irritatedly of the "flighty" 
French influence in British colonies. 
For these immense territories (and those of Belgium, Holland, Spain, 
Portugal, Germany) the metropolitan Western cultures devised huge invest­
ments and strategies. Very few people in Britain or France seemed to think 
that anything would change. I have tried to show that most cultural .forma­
tions presumed the permanent primacy of the imperial power. Still, ·an 
alternative view to imperialism arose, persisted, and eventually prevailed. 
By 1950 Indonesia had won its freedom from Holland. In 1947 Britain 
handed over India to the Congress Party, and Pakistan immediately split off, 
guided by Jinnah's Muslim League. Malaysia; Ceylon, and Burma became 
independent, as did the nations of"French" Southeast Asia. All through East, 
West, and North Africa, British, French, and Belgian occupations were 
terminated, sometimes (as in Algeria) with enormous losses of life and 
property. Forty-nine new African states came into existence by 1990. But 
none of these struggles took place in a vacuum. As Grimal points out, the 
internationalized relationship between colonizer and colonized was spurred 
by global forc~hurches, the United Nations, Marxism, the Soviet Union 
and the United States. The anti-imperial struggle, as so many Pan-African, 
Pan-Arab, Pan-Asian congresses testified, was universalized, and the rift 
between Western (white, European, advanced) and non-Western (colored, 
native, underdeveloped) cultures and peoples was dramatized. 
Because this redrawing of the world's map was so dramatic, we have lost 
(and perhaps have been encouraged to lose) an accurate historical, let alone 
moral sense that even in the contentiousness of struggle, imperialism and .its 
opponents fought over the same terrain, contested the same history. Cer­
tainly they overlapped where French-educated Algerians or Vietnamese, 
British-educated East or West Indians, Arabs, and Africans confronted their 
imperial masters. Opposition to empire in London and Paris was affected by 
resistance offered in Delhi and Algiers. Although it was not the struggle of 
same with same (a standard imperialist misrepresentation has it that exclu­
sively Western ideas of freedom led the fight against colonial rule, which 
mischievously overlooks the reserves in Indian and Arab culture that alwayr 
resisted imperialism, and claims the fight against imperialism as one of 
imperialism's major triumphs), opponents on the same cultural ground had 
fascinating encounters. Without metropolitan doubts and opposition, the 
characters, idiom, and very structure of native resistance to imperialism 200 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
would have been different. Here, too, culture is in advance of politics, 
military history, or economic process. 
This overlapping is not a small or negligible point. Just as culture may 
predispose and actively prepare one society for the overseas domination of 
another, it may also prepare that society to relinquish or modify the idea of 
overseas domination. These changes cannot occur without the willingness of 
men and women to resist the pressures of colonial rule, to take up arms, to 
project ideas of liberation, and to imagine (as Benedict Anderson has it) a 
new national community, to take the final plunge. Nor can they occur unless 
either economic or political exhaustion with empire sets in at home, unless 
the idea of empire and the cost of colonial rule are challenged publicly, 
unless the representations of imperialism begin to lose their justification and 
legitimacy, and, finally, unless the rebellious "natives" impress upon the 
metropolitan culture the independence and integrity of their own culture, 
free from colonial encroachment. But having noted all these prerequisites, 
we should acknowledge that, at both ends of the redrawn ijlap, opposition 
and resistance to imperialism are articulated together on a largely common 
although disputed terrain provided by culture. 
What are the cultural grounds on which both natives and liberal Euro­
peans lived and understood each other? How much could they grant each 
other? How, within the circle of imperial domination, could they deal with 
each other before radical change occurred? Consider first E. M Forster's A 
Passage to India, a novel that surely expresses the author's affection (some­
times petulant and mystified) for the place. I have always felt that the most 
interesting thing about A Passage to India is Forster's using India to represent 
material that according to the canons of the novel form cannot in fact be 
represented-vastness, incomprehensible creeds, secret motions, histories, 
and social forms. Mrs. Moore especially and Fielding too are clearly meant 
to be understood as Europeans who go beyond the anthropomorphic norm 
in remaining in that (to them) terrifying new element-in Fielding's case, 
experiencing India's complexity but then returning to familiar humanism 
(following the trial he comes home through Suez and Italy to England, after 
having had a shattering presentiment of what India could do to one's sense 
of time and place). 
But Forster is too scrupulous an observer of the reality that contains him 
to leave it at that. The novel returns to a traditional sense of social propriety 
in its last section, where the author deliberately and affi~atively importS 
into India the habitual novelistic domestic resolution (marriage and prop­
erty): Fielding marries Mrs. Moore's daughter. Yet he and Aziz-a Muslim 
nationalist-ride together and remain apart" 'They didn't want it,' they said There Are Two Side! 201 
in their hundred voices, 'No, not yet,' and the sky said, 'No, not here.'" 
There is resolution and union, but neither is complete.l 9 
If present-day India is neither the place nor the time (Forster's directions 
are careful) for identity, convergence, merger, then for what? The novel 
indicates that the politicalorigins of this issue lie in the British presence, yet 
it also allows one to experience various aspects of this impasse with a feeling 
that the political confiict will simply be resolved in the future. Godbole's and 
Aziz's diametrically different resistances to empire are acknowledged-Aziz 
the Muslim nationalist, Godbole the almost surrealistic Hindu-and so is 
Fielding's inherent opposition, though he cannot put his objections to the 
iniquities of British rule in political or philosophical terms, and only makes 
local objections to local abuses. Benita Parry's interesting argument in Delu­
sions and Discoveries that Forster resolves the novel positively hinges on 
"evanescent hints" given by Forster despite "the total text":20 it is more exact 
to say that he intended the gulf between India and Britain to stand, but 
allowed intermittent crossings back and forth. Be that as it may, we are 
entitled to associate the Indian animosity against British rule that is dis­
played during Aziz's trial with the emergence of a visible Indian resistance, 
which Fielding comes reluctantly to perceive in Aziz, one of whose national­
ist models is Japan. The British club members whose snubs force Fielding 
to resign are nervous and downright nasty, and they consider Aziz's infrac­
tion to -be such that any sign of "weakness" is an attack on British rule itself: 
these too are indications of a hopeless atmosphere. 
Almost by virtue of its liberal, humane espousal of Fielding's views and 
attitudes, A Passage to India is at a loss, partly because Forster's commitment 
to the novel form exposes him to difficulties in India he cannot deal with. 
Like Conrad's Africa, Forster's India is a locale frequently described as 
unapprehendable and too large. Once, when Ronny and Adela are together 
early in the novel, they watch a bird disappear into a tree, yet they cannot 
identify it since, as Forster adds for their benefit and ours, "nothing in India 
is identifiable, the mere asking of a question causes it to disappear or to 
merge in something else."21 The crux of the novel is therefore the sustained 
encounter between the English colonials--"well-developed bodies, fairly 
developed minds, and undeveloped hearts"-and India. 
As Adela approaches the Marabar Caves, she notes that the train's 
"pomper, pomper," which accompanied her musing, had a message she 
could not fathom. 
How could the mind take hold of such a country? Generations of 
invaders have tried, but they remain in exile. The important towns they 2.02. RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
build are only retreats, their quarrels the malaise of men who cannot 
find their way home. India knows of their trouble. She. knows of the 
whole world's trouble to its uttermost depth. She calls "Come" through 
her hundred mouths, through objects ridiculous and august. But come 
to what? She has never defined. She is not a promise, only an appeaP 2 
Yet Forster shows how British "officialism" tries to impose sense on India. 
There are orders of precedence, clubs with rules, restrictions, military hier­
archies, and, standing above and informing it all, British power. India "is not 
a tea-party," says Ronny Heaslop. "I have never known anything but disaster 
result when English people and Indians attempt to be intimate socially. 
Intercourse, yes. Courtesy, by all means. Intimacy-never, never." 23 No 
wonder that Dr. Aziz is so surprised when Mrs. Moore takes off her shoes 
to enter a mosque, a gesture that suggests deference and establishes friend-
ship in a manner forbidden by the code. , 
Fielding is also untypical: truly intelligent and sensitivt;, happiest in the 
give-and-take of a private conversation. Yet his capacities for understanding 
and sympathy fail before India's massive incomprehensibility; he would 
have been a perfect hero in Forster's earlier fictions, but here he is defeated. 
At least Fielding can "connect" with a character like Aziz, half of Forster's 
ploy for dealing with India in a· British novel by dividing it into two parts, 
one Islamic, the other Hindu. In 1857, Harriet Martineau had remarked, 
"The unprepared mind, whether Hindu or Mussu]man, developed under 
Asiatic conditions, cannot be in sympathy, more or less, intellectually or 
morally, with the Christianized European mind." 24 Forster emphasizes the 
Muslims, compared with whom the Hindus (including Godbole) are periph­
eral, as if they were not amenable to novelistic treatment. Islam was closer 
to Western culrure, standing in a median position to the English and the 
Hindus in Forster's Chandrapore. Forster is slightly nearer Islam than Hin­
duism in A Ptmagt to India, but the final lack of sympathy is obvious. 
Hindus, according to the novel, believe that all is muddle, all connected, 
God is one, is not, was not, was. By contrast, Islam, as represented by Aziz, 
apprehends order and a specific God. ("The comparatively simple mind of 
the Mohammedan," 25 says Forster ambiguously, as if to imply both that Aziz 
has a comparatively simple mind, and that "the Mohammedan," generally 
speaking, does also.) To Fielding, Aziz is quasi-Italian, although his exag­
gerated view of the Mogul past, his passion for poetry, his odd pudeur with 
the picrures of his wife that he carries around, suggest an exotic un-Mediter­
ranean being. Despite Fielding's wonderful Bloomsbury qualities, his ability 
to judge charitably and lovingly, his passionate intelligence based on human 
norms, he is finally rejected by India itself, to whose disorienting heart .only 
! There Are Two Sides 
Mrs. Moore penetrates, but she is ultimately killed by her vision. Dr. Aziz 
becomes a nationalist, but I think Forster is disappointed by him for what 
only seem his posmrings; he cannot connect him 'to the larger, coherent 
movement for Indian independence. According to Francis Hutchins, in the 
late nineteenth cenmry and early twentieth "the nationalist movement, to 
an astonishing extent, drew no response from the British imagination in 
India" 26 
When they travelled through India in 1912, Beatrice and Sidney Webb 
noted the difficulty British employers were having with Indian laborers 
working for the Raj, either because laziness was a form of resistance (very 
common elsewhere in Asia, as S. H. Alatas has shown) 27 or because of the 
so-called "drain theory" of Dadabhai Naoroji, who had argued to the satis­
faction of nationalist parties that India's wealth was being drained off by the 
British. The W ebbs blame "those old standing European inhabitants of India 
[who] .have not acquired the art of managing the Indians." Then they add: 
What is equally clear is that the Indian is sometimes an extraordinarily 
difficult worker to meat. He does not care enough for his earnings. He 
prefers to waste away in semi-starvation than overwork himself. How­
ever low his standard oflife, his standard of work is lower--at any rate 
when he is working for an employer he does not like. And his ir­
regularities are baffting. 28 
This hardly suggests a contest between two warring nations; similarly, in A 
Parrage to India Forster finds India difficult because it is so strange and 
unidentifiable, or because people like Aziz will let themselves be seduced by 
jejune nationalist sentiment, or because if one tries to come to terms with it, 
as Mrs. Moore does, one cannot recover from the encounter. 
To the Westerners Mrs. Moore is a nuisance, as she is to herself after her 
sojourn in the Caves. To the Indians roused momentarily to a sort of 
nationalist coherence during the court scene; Mrs. Moore is less a person 
than a mobilizing phrase, a funny Indianized principle of protest and com­
munity: "Esmiss Esmoor." She has an experience of India that she does not 
understand, whereas Fielding superficially understands but does not have 
the deep experience. The novel's helplessness neither goes all the way and 
condemns (or defends) British colonialism, nor condemns or defends Indian 
nationalism. True, Forster's ironies undercut everyone from the blimpish 
Turtons and Buttons to the posmring, comic Indians, but one cannot help 
feeling that in view of the political realities .of the 191os and 191os even such 
a remarkable novel as A Parrage to India nevertheless founders on the un­
dodgeable facts of Indian nationalism. Forster identifies the course of the RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
narrative with a Britisher, Fielding, who can understand only that India is 
too vast and baffling, and that a Muslim like Aziz can be befriended only up 
to a point, since his antagonism to colonialism is so unacceptably silly. The 
sense that India and Britain are opposed nations (though their positions 
overlap), is played dow~, muffled, frittered away. 
These are the prerogatives of a novel that deals with personal, not official 
or national, histories. Kipling, in contrast, directly acknowledged the politi­
cal reality as more than a source of novelistic irony, however threatened, 
tragic, or violent the history of Britain in India may have been for him. 
Indians are a various lot, they need to be known and understood, British 
power has to reckon with Indians in India: such are Kipling's coordinates, 
politically speaking. Forster is evasive and more patronizing; there is truth 
to Parry's comment that '11 Passage to India is the triumphant expression of 
the British imagination exploring India,"Z 9 but it is also true that Forster's 
India is so affectionately personal and so remorselessly metaphysical that his 
view of Indians as a nation contending for sovereignty with Britain is not 
politically very serious, or even respectful. Consider the following: 
Hamidullah had called in on his way to a worrying committee of 
notables, nationalist in tendency, where Hindus, Moslems, two Sikhs, 
two Parsis, aJain, and Native Christian tried to like one another more 
than came natufl!.l to them. As long as someone abused the English, all 
went well, but nothing constructive had been achieved, and if the 
English were to leave India, the committee would vanish also. He was 
glad that Aziz, whom he loved and whose family was connected with 
his own, took no interest in politics, which ruin the character and 
career, yet nothing can be ac~ieved without them. He thought of 
Cambridge-sadly, as of another poem that had ended. How happy he 
had been there, twenty years ago! Politics had not mattered in Mr. and 
Mrs. Bannister's rectory. There, games, work, -and pleasant society had 
interwoven, and appeared to be sufficient substructure for a national 
life. Here all was wire-pulling and fear.JO 
This registers a change in political climate: what was once possible in the 
Bannister rectory or in Cambridge is no longer appropriate in the age of 
strident nationalism. But Forster sees Indians with imperial eyes when he 
says that it is "natural" for. sects to dislike one another ot when he dismisses 
the power of nationalist committees to last beyond the English presence, or 
when nationalism, humdrum and modest though it may have been, is only 
"wire-pulling and fear." His presumption is that he can get past the puerile 
nationalist put-ons to the essential India; when it comes to ruling India-There Are Two Side.r 2.0) 
which is what Hamidullah and the others are agitating about-the English 
had better go on doing it, despite their mistakes: "they" are not yet ready for 
self-rule. 
This view goes back to Mill, of course, and surprisingly resembles the 
position of Bulwer-Lytton, who as Viceroy in 1878 and 1879 had this to say: 
Already great mischief has been done by the deplorable tendency of 
second-rate Indian officials, and superficial English philanthropists to 
ignore the essential and insurmountable distinctions of race qualities, 
which are fundamental to our position in Jndia; and thus, unintention­
.ally, to pamper the conceit and the vanity of half-educated natives, to 
the serious detriment of commonsense, and of the wholesome recogni­
tion of realities. 31 
On another occasion he said that "the Baboodom of Lower Bengal, though 
disloyal is fortunately cowardly and its only revolver is its ink bottle; which 
though dirty, is not dangerous." 32 In The Emergence of Indian Nationalism, 
where these passages are cited, Ani! Seal notes that Bulwer-Lytton missed 
the main trend in Indian politics, a trend perceived by an alert District 
Commissioner who wrote that 
twenty years ago ... we had to take account of local nationalities and 
particular races. The resentment of the Mahratta did not involve that 
of the Bengalee .... Now ... we have changed all that, and are beginning 
to lind ourselves face to face, not with the population of individual 
provinces, but with z.oo millions of people united by sympathies and 
intercourse which we have ourselves created and fostered. 33 
Of course Forster was a novelist, not a political officer or theorist or 
prophet. Yet he found a way to use the mechanism of the novel to elaborate 
on the already existing structure of attitude and reference without changing 
it. This structure permitted one to feel affection for and even intimacy with 
some Indians and India generally, but made one see Indian politics as the 
charge of the British, and culturally refused a privilege to Indian nationalism 
(which, by the way, it gave willingly to Greeks and Italians). Ani! Seal again: 
} 
In Egypt, as in India, activities inconvenient to the British were judged 
to be self-interested machinations rather than genuine nationalisms. 
The Gladstone government saw Arabi's revolt in Egypt as a few army 
officers on the make, abetted by some Egyptian intellectuals who had 
taken to reading the works of Lamartine--a comforting conclusion for 2.06 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
it justified Gladstonians in negating their own principles. After all, 
there were no Garibaldis in Cairo. And neither were there in Calcutta 
or Bombay. 34 
How a resisting nationalism can be represented by a British writer who 
vi.ews it sympathetically is a problem Forster does not himself explicitly take 
on in his own work. It is, however, very affectingly studied by the crusading 
opponent of British policy in India, Edward Thompson, in his Tbe Otber Side 
of tbe Medal, published in 1926, two years after A Passage to India. Thompson's 
subject is misrepresentation. Indians, he says, see the English entirely 
through the experience of British brutality during the 1857 "Mutiny." The 
English, with the pompous, cold-blooded religiosity of the Raj at its worst, 
see Indians and their history as barbaric, uncivilized, inhuman. Thompson 
notes the imbalance between the two misrepresentations, that one misrepre­
sentation has all the power of modern technology and diffusion to back 
it-from the army to the Oxford History of/ndit~--wherea,s the other relies on 
the p"amphlet and the mobilizing rejectionist sentiments of an oppressed 
people. Still, Thompson says, we must recognize the fact that Indian 
hatred exists--savage, set hatred-is certain; and the sooner we recog­
nize it, and search for its reasons, the better. The discontent with our 
rule is growing universal, and there must be first, widespread popular 
memories to account for that discontent being able to spread; and, 
secondly, blazing hatred at its heart, to have caused it to gather such 
rapid momentum.H 
Hence, he says, we must ask for "a new orientation in the histories oflndia," 
we must express "atonement" for what we have done, and above all, we 
should recognize that Indian men and women "want their self-respect given 
back to them. Make them free again, and enable them to look us and 
everyone in the eyes, and they will behave like free people and cease to 
lie."J6 
Thompson's powerful and admirable book is deeply symptomatic in two 
ways. He admits the paramount importance of culture in. consolidating 
imperial feeling: the writing of history, he says over and over, is tied to the 
extension of empire. His is one of the earliest and most persuasive metropol­
itan attempts to understand imperialism as a cultural affliction for colonizer 
as well as· colonized. But he is bound to the notion that there is "a truth" to 
events involving both sides that transcends them. Indians "lie" because they 
are not free, whereas he (and other oppositional figures like him) can see the 
truth because they are free and because they are English. No more than There Are Two Side.r 
Forster could Thompson grasp that-as Fanon argued-the empire never 
gives anything away out of goodwill. 37 It cannot give Indians their freedom, 
but must be forced to yield it as the result of a protracted political, cultural, 
and sometimes military struggle that becomes more, not less adversarial as 
time goes on. Similarly the British, who in holding on to empire are part of 
the same dynamic; their attitudes can only be defended until they are 
defeated. 
The battle between native and white man had to be visibly joined, as it 
had been by 1926, for Thompson to see himself as being on "the other side." 
There are now two sides, two nations, in combat, not merely the voice of 
the white master answered antiphonally-rea<:tively-by the colonial up­
start. Fanon calls this in a theatrical passage the "alterity of rupture, of 
conflict, of battle." 38 Thompson accepts this more fully than Forster, for 
whom the novel's nineteenth-century legacy of seeing the natives as subor­
dinate and dependent is still powerful. 
In France, there was no one who, like Kipling, even as he celebrated the 
empire warned of its impending cataclysmic demise, and no one like Forster, 
either. France was culturally attached to what Raoul Girardet calls a double 
movement of pride and worry-pride taken in work accomplished in the 
colonies, fear about the colonies' destiny. 39 But as in England, the French 
reaction to Asian and African nationalism scarcely amounted to a lifted 
eyebrow, except when the Communist Party, in line with the Third Inter~ 
national, supported anti-colonial revolution and resistance against em­
pire. Girardet remarks that two important works by Gide in the years 
after L1mmorali.rte, his Voyage au Congo (1927) and Retour du Tchad (1928), 
raise doubts about French colonialism in sub-Saharan Africa, but he 
adds shrewdly, Gide nowhere questions "le principe el1e-m~me de Ia 
colonisation" 40 
The pattern is, alas, always the same: critics of colonialism like Gide and 
Tocqueville attack abuses in places and by powers that do not greatly touch 
them and either condone abuses of power in French territories they care 
about or, failing to make a general case against all repression or imperial 
hegemony, say nothing. 
During the 1930s a.serious ethnographic literature lovingly and painstak­
ingly discussed native societies in the French imperium. Works by Maurice 
Delafosse, Charles Andre Julien, Labouret, Marcel Griaule, Michel Leiris 
gave substantive and careful thought to distant, often obscure cultures, and 
gave them an esteem otherwise denied within the strictures of political 
imperialism. 41 
Something of that special mix of learned attention and the imperial 
enclosure is to be found in Malraux's La Voie royale (r93o), one of the least RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
known and discussed of his works. Malraux was himselfboth adventurer and 
amateur ethnographer-archeologist; in his background were Leo Frobenius, 
the Conrad of Heart of Darkness, T. E. Lawrence, Rim baud, Nietzsche, and, 
I am convinced, Gide's character Menalque. La Voie royale enacts a voyage 
into "the interior," in this case French Indochina (a fact scarcely noted by 
Malraux's major critics, for whom, as with Camus and his critics, the only 
setting worth talking about is European). Perken and Claude (the narrator) 
on the one hand, and the French authorities on the other contest for domi­
nation and loot: Perken wants the Cambodian bas-reliefs, the bureaucrats 
look on his quest with suspicion and dislike. When the adventurers find 
Grabot, a Kurtz figure, who has been captured, blinded, and tortured, they 
try to get him back from the natives who have him, but his spirit has been 
broken. After Perken is wounded and his diseased leg is seen to be destroy:.. 
ing him, the indomitable egoist (like Kurtz in his final agony) pronounces his 
defiant message to the grieving Claude (like Marlow): 
"il n'y a pas ... de mort ... II y a seulement . ,. . 'moi ... Un doigt se 
crispa sur Ia cuisse. . . . moi ... qui vais mourir. •otz 
The jungle and tribes of Indochina are represented in La Voie royale with 
a combination of fear and inviting allure. Grabot is held by Mois tribespeo­
ple; Perken has ruled the Stieng people for a long period and, like a devoted 
anthropologist, tries in vain to protect them from encroaching moderniza­
tion (in the form of a colonial railroad). Yet despite the menace and disquiet 
of the novel's imperial setting, little suggests the political menace, or that the 
cosmic doom engulfing Claude, Perken, and Grabot is anything more his­
torically concrete than a generalized malevolence against which one must 
exert one's will. Yes, one can negotiate small deals in the alien world of the 
intligmes (Perken does this with· the Mois, for example), but his overall 
hatred for Cambodia suggests, rather melodramatically, the metaphysical 
gulf separating East from West. 
I attach so much importance to La Voie royale because, as the work of an 
extraordinary European talent, it testifies so conclusively to the inability of 
the Western humanistic conscience to confront the political challenge of 
the imperial domains. For both Forster in the 192os and Malraux in 1930, 
men genuinely familiar with the non-European world, a grander destiny 
confronts the West than one of mere national self-determination-self­
consciousness, will, or even the deep issues of taste and discrimination. 
Perhaps the novel form itself dulls their perceptions, with its structure of 
attitude and reference held over from the previous century. If one compares 
Malraux with the celebrated French expert on Indochinese culture Paul Themes of Resistance Culture 
Mus, whose book Viet-Nam: Sociologic d'une guerre appeared twenty years 
later, on the eve ofDien Bien Phu, and who saw, as Edward Thompson did, 
the profound political crisis that separated France from Indochina, the 
difference is striking. In a remarkable chapter entitled "Sur Ia route Viet­
namienne" (perhaps echoing La Voie rvyale), Mus speaks plainly of the 
French institutional system and its secular violation of Vietnamese sacred 
values; the Chinese, he says, understood Vietnam better than France, with· 
its railroads, schools, and "administration laique." Without religious man­
date, with little knowledge of Vietnamese traditional morality, and even less 
attention to local nativism and sensibility, the French were merely inatten­
tive conquerors. 43 
Like Thompson, Mus sees Europeans and Asiatics bound together, and, 
again like Thompson, he opposes continuing the colonial system. He pro­
poses independence for Vietnam, despite the Soviet and Chinese menace, 
yet wants a' French-Vietnamese pact that would give France certain privi­
leges in Vietnamese reconstruction (this is the burden of the book's final 
chapter, "Que faire?"). This is a very far cry from Malraux, but only a small 
mutation in the European concept of tutelage--albeit enlightened tute­
lage--for the non-European. And it falls short of recognizing the full 
strength of what so far as Western imperialism was concerned became the 
Third World's antinomian nationalism, which expressed not cooperation 
but··antagonism. 
( II ) 
Themes of Resi.rtance Culture 
T he slow and often bitterly disputed recovery of geographical territory 
which is at the heart of decolonization is preceded-as empire had 
been--by the charting of cultural territory. After the period of "primary 
resistance," literally fighting against outside intrusion, there comes the pe­
riOd of secondary, that is, ideological resistance, when efforts are made to 
reconstitute a "shattered community, to save or restore the sense and fact of 
community against all the pressures of the colonial system," 44 as Basil 
Davidson puts it This in tum makes possible the establishment of new and 
independent stakes. It is important to note that we are not mainly talking 
here about utopian, regions--idyllic meadows, so to speak-discovered in 
their private past by the intellectuals, poets, prophets, leaders, and historians 210 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
of resistance. Davidson speaks of the "otherworldly" promises made by some 
in their early phase, for example, rejecting Christianity and the wearing of 
Western clothes. But all of them respond to the humiliations of colonialism, 
and lead to "the principal teaching of nationalism: the need to find the 
ideological basis for a wider unity than any known before." 45 
This basis is found, I believe, in the rediscovery and repatriation of what 
had been suppressed in the natives' past by the processes of imperialism. 
Thus we can understand Fanon's insistence on rereading Hegel's master­
slave dialectic in light of the colonial situation, a situation in which Fanon 
remarks on how the master in imperialism "differs basically from the master 
described by Hegel. For Hegel there is reciprocity; here the master laughs 
at the consciousness of the slave. What he wants from the slave is not 
recognition but work." 46 To achieve recognition is to rechan and then 
occupy the place in imperial cultural forms reserved for subordination, to 
occupy it self-consciously, fighting for it on the very same territory once 
ruled by a consciousness that assumed the subordination of a designated 
inferior O~her. Hence, reinscription. The irony is that Hegel's dialectic is 
Hegel's, after all: he was there first, just as the Marxist dialectic of subject 
and object had been there before the F anon of Les Damnes used it to explain 
the struggle between colonizer and colonized. 
That is the panial tragedy of resistance, that it must to a cenain degree 
work to recover forms already established or at least influenced or infiltrated 
by the culture of empire. This is another instance of what I have called 
overlapping territories: the struggle over Africa in the twentieth century, for 
example, is over territories designed and redesigned by explorers from 
Europe for generations, a process memorably and painstakingly conveyed in 
Philip Currin's The Image of Africa. 47 Just as the Europeans saw Africa polemi­
cally as a blank place when they took it, or assumed its supinely yielding 
availability when they plotted to panition it at the 1884-85 Berlin Congress, 
decolonizing Africans found it necessary to reimagine an Africa stripped of 
its imperial past. 
Take as a specific instance of this battle over projections and ideological 
images the so-called quest or voyage motif, which appears in much Euro­
pean literature and especially literature about the non-European world. In 
all the great explorers' narratives of the late Renaissance (Daniel Defen has 
aptly called them the collection of the world [Ia collecte du monde ])48 and 
those of the nineteenth-century explorers and ethnographers, not to men­
tion Conrad's voyage up the Congo, there is the topos of the voyage south 
as Mary Louise Pratt has called it, referring to Gide and Camus, 49 in which 
the motif of control and authority has "sounded uninterruptedly." For the Theme.r of Re.ri.rtance Culture 2.U 
native who begins to see and hear that persisting note, it sounds "the note 
of crisis, of banishment, banishment from the bean, banishment from home." 
This is how Stephen Dedalus memorably states it in the Library episode of 
Ulyssesl 0 the decolonizing native writer--such as Joyce, the Irish writer 
colonized by the British-re-experiences the quest-voyage motif from 
which he had been banished by means of the same trope carried over from 
the imperial into the new culture and adopted, reused, relived. 
The River Between, by James Ngugi (later Ngugi wa Thiongo ), redoes Heart 
of Darkness by inducing life into Conrad's river on the very first page. "The 
river was called Honia, which meant cure, or bring-back-to-life. i-lonia river 
never dried: it seemed to possess a strong will to live, scorning droughts and 
weather changes. And it went on in the very same way, never hurrying, 
never hesitating. People saw this and were happy." 51 Conrad's images of 
river, exploration, and ~ysterious setting are never far from our awareness 
as we read, yet they are quite differently weighted, differently-even jar­
ringly-experienced in a deliberately understated, self,cons.ciously unidi­
omatic and austere language. In Ngugi the white man recedes in 
importance--he is compressed into a single missionary figure emblemati­
cally called Livingstone--although his infiuence is felt in the divisions that 
separate the villages, the riverbanks, and the people from one another. In the 
internal conflict ravaging Waiyaki's life, Ngugi powerfully conveys the 
unresolved tensions that will continue well after the novel ends and that the 
novel makes no effort to contain. A new pattern, suppressed in Heart of 
Darkness, appears, out of which Ngugi generates a new mythos, whose 
tenuous course and final obscurity suggest a return to an African Africa. 
And in Tayeb Salih's Sefl.fon of Migration to the North, Conrad's river is now 
the Nile, whose waters rejuvenate its peoples, and Conrad's first-person 
British narrative style and European protagonists are in ·a sense· reversed, 
first through the use of Arabic; second in that Salih's novel concerns the 
northward voyage of a Sudanese to Europe; and third, because the narrator 
speaks from a Sudanese village. A voyage into the heart of darkness is thus 
converted. into a sacralized hegira from the Sudanese countryside, still 
weighted down with its colonial legacy, into the heart of Europe, where 
Mostapha Said, a mirror image of Kunz, unleashes ritual violence on him­
self, on European women, on the narrator's understanding. The hegira con­
cludes with Said's return to and suicide in his native village. So deliberate 
are Salih's mimetic reversals of Conrad that even Kurtz's skull-topped fence 
is repeated and distorted in the inventory of European books stacked in 
Said's secret library. The interventions and crossings from north to south, 
and from south to non;h, enlarge and complicate the back-and-forth colonial 1I:1. RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
trajectory mapped by Conrad; what results is not simply a reclamation of the 
fictive territory, but an articulation of some of the discrepancies and their 
imagined consequences muffied by Conrad's majestic prose. 
Over there is like here, neither better nor worse. But I am from here, 
just as the date palm standing in the courtyard of our house has grown 
in our house and not in anyone else's. The fact that they came to our 
land I know not why, does that mean· that we should poison our present 
and our future? Sooner or later they will leave our country, just as many 
people throughout history left many countries. The railways, ships, 
hospitals, factories, and schools will be ours and we'll speak their 
language without either a sense of guilt or a sense of gratitude. Once 
again we shall be as we were--ordinary people--and if we are lies we 
shall be lies of our own making. 52 
The post~ imperial writers of the Third World therefore bear their past 
within them-as scars of humiliating wounds, as instigation for different 
practices, as potentially revised visions ofthe past tending toward a post­
colonial future, as urgently reinterpretable and redeployable experiences, in 
which the formerly silent native speaks and acts on territory reclaimed as 
pan of a general movement of resistance, from the colonist. 
Another motif emerges in the culture of resistance. Consider the stunning 
cultural effon to claim a restored and invigorated authority over a region in 
the many modern Latin American and Caribbean versions of Shakespeare's 
The Tempm. This fable is one of several that stand guard over the imagina­
tion of the New World; other stories are the adventures and discoveries of 
Columbus, Robinson Crusoe, John Smith and Pocahontas, and the adven­
tures of Inkle and Yariko. (A brilliant study, Colonial Encounterr by Peter 
Hulme, surveys them all in some detail.) 53 It is a measure of how embattled 
this matter of"inaugural figures" has become that it is now vinually impossi­
ble to say anything simple about any of them. To call this reinterpretative 
zeal merely simpleminded, vindictive, or assaultive is wrong, I think. In a 
totally new way in Western culture, the interventions of non-European 
artists and scholars cannot be dismissed or silenced, and these interventions 
are not only an integral part of a political movement, but in many ways the 
movement's ruccesifuJJy guiding imagination, intellectual and figurative en­
ergy reseeing and rethinking the terrain common to whites and non-whites. 
For natives to want to lay claim to that terrain is, for many Westerners, an 
intolerable effrontery, for theQJ. actually to repossess it unthinkable. 
The core of Aime Cesaire's Caribbean Une Tempete is not ressentiment, but 
an affectionate contention with Shakespeare for the right to represent the Themes of Resistance Culture 
Caribbean. That impulse to contend is part of a grander effort to discover 
the bases of an integral identity different from the formerly dependent, 
derivative one. Caliban, according to George Lamming, "is the excluded, 
that which is eternally below possibility .... He is seen as an occasion, a state 
of existence which can be appropriated and exploited to the purposes of 
another's own development." 54 If that is so, then Caliban must be shown to 
have a history that can be perceived on its own, as the result ofCaliban's own 
effort. One must, according tp Lamming, "explode Prospero's· old myth" by 
christening "language afresh"; but this cannot occur "until we show language 
as the product of human endeavor; until we make available to all the result 
of certain enterprises undertaken by men who are still regarded as the 
unfortunate descendants of languageless and deformed slaves." 55 
Lamming's point is that, while identity is crucial, just to assert·a different 
identity is never enough. The main thing is to be able to see that Caliban 
has a history capable of development, as part of the process of work, growth, 
and mamrity to which only Europeans had seemed entitled. Each new 
American reinscription of The Tempest is therefore a local version of the old 
grand story, invigorated and inflected by the pressures of an unfolding 
political and culmral history. The Cuban critic Roberto Fernandez Retamar 
m11kes the significant point that for modern Latin Americans and Carib­
beans, it is Caliban himself, and not Ariel, who is the main symbol of 
hybridity, with his strange and unpredictable mixmre of attributes. This is 
truer·'to the Creole, or me.rtizo composite of the new America. 56 
Retamar's choice of Caliban over Ariel signals a profoundly important 
ideological debate at the heart of the culmral effort to decolonize, an effort 
at the restoration of community and repossession of culmre that goes on 
long after the political establishment of independent nation-states. Resis­
tance and decolonization as I talk about them here persist well after success­
ful nationalism has come to a stop. This debate is symbolized in Ngugi's 
Decoloni.ring the Mind (1986), which records his farewell to English as well as 
his attempt to further the cause of liberation by exploring African language 
and literamre more deeply. 57 A similar effort is embodied in Barbara Har­
iow's important book, Re.ri.rtance Literature (1987), whose purpose is to employ 
the tools of recent literary theory to give a place to "the literary output of 
geopoiitical areas which stand in opposition to the very social and political 
organization within which the theories are located and to which they 
respond." 58 
The basic form of the debate is best immediately translated into a set of 
alternatives that we can derive from the Ariel-Caliban choice, whose history 
in Latin America is a special and unusual one but useful for other areas as 
well. The Latin American discussion (to which Retama~ is a well-known RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
recent contributor: others were Jose Enrique Rod6 and Jose Marti) is really 
a response to the question How does a culture seeking to become indepen­
dent of imperialism imagine its own past? One choice is to do it as Ariel does, 
that is, as a willing servant ofProspero; Ariel does what he is told obligingly, 
and, when he gains his freedom, he returns to his native element, a sort of 
bourgeois native untroubled by his collaboration with Prospera. A second 
choice. is 'to do it like Caliban, aware of and accepting his mongrel past but 
not disabled for future development. A third choice is to be a Caliban who 
sheds his current servitude and physical disfigurements in the process of 
discovering his essential, pre-colonial self. This Caliban is behind the nativist 
and radical nationalisms that produced concepts of negritude, Islamic funda­
mentalism, Arabism, and the like. 
Both Calibans nourish and require each other. Every subjugated commu­
nity in Europe, Australia, Africa, Asia, and the Americas has played the 
sorely tried and oppressed Caliban to some outside master like Prospero. To 
become aware of one's self as belonging to a subject people is the founding 
insight of anti-imperialist nationalism. From that insight came literatures, 
innumerable political parties, a host of other struggles for minority and 
women's rights, and, much of the time, newly Independent states. Yet, as 
Fanon rightly observes, nationalist consciousness can very easily lead to 
frozen rigidity; merely to replace white officers and bureaucrats with colored 
equivalents, he says, is no guarantee that the nationalist functionaries will 
not replicate the old dispensation. The dangers of chauvinism and xenopho­
bia ("Mrica for the Africans") are very real. It is best when Caliban sees his 
own history as an aspect of the history of all subjugated men and women, and 
comprehends the complex truth of his own social and historical situation. 
We must not minimize the shattering importance of that initial insight­
peoples being conscious of themselves as prisoners in their own land-for 
it returns again and again in the literature of the imperialized world. The 
history of empire-punctuated by uprisings throughout most of the nine­
teenth century-in India; in German, French, Belgian, and British Africa; in 
Haiti, Madagascar, North Africa, Burma, the Philippines, Egypt, and else­
where--seems incoherent unless one recognizes that sense of beleaguered 
imprisonment infused with a passion for community that grounds anti­
imperial resistance in cultural effort. Aime Cesaire: 
Ce qui est a moi aussi: une petite 
cellule dans Je Jura, 
une petite cellule, Ia neige Ia double de ba"eaux blancs 
Ia neige est un geolier blanc qui monte 
Ia garde devant une prison Theme.r of Re.ri.rtance Culture 
Ce qui est a mot:· 
c'est un homme seul emprisonne tie 
blanc 
c'est un homme seuJ qui titfie le.r cri.r 
blancs tie Ia morte blanche 
(TOUSSAINT, TOUSSAINT L 'OUVERTURE)' 9 115 
Most often, the concept of race itself gives the prison its raison ti'etre; and 
it rums up nearly everywhere in the culture of resistance. Tagore speaks of 
it in his great lectures called Nationalism, published in 1917. "The Nation" is 
for Tagore a tight and unforgiving receptacle of power for producing con­
formity, whether British, Chinese, Indian, or Japanese. India's answer, he 
said, must be to provide not a competing nationalism, but a creative solution 
to the divisiveness produced by radal consciousness. 60 A similar insight is at 
the heart of W.E.B. Du Bois's The Souls of Black Folk (1903): "How does it feel 
to be a problem? ... Why did God make me an outcast and a stranger in mine 
own house?" 61 Both Tagore and Du Bois; however, warn against a wholesale, 
indiscriminate attack on white or Western culture. It is not Western culture 
that is to blame, says Tagore, but "the judicious niggardliness of the N arion 
that has taken upon itself the white man's burden of criticizing the East." 62 
· Three great topics emerge in decolonizing cultural resistance, separated 
for analytical purposes, but all related. One, of course, is the insistence on 
the right to see the community's history whole, coherently, integrally. Re­
store' the imprisoned nation to itself. (Benedict Anderson connects this in 
Europe to "print-capitalism," which "gave a new fixity to language" and 
"created unified fields of exchange and communications below Latin and 
above the spoken vernaculars.") 63 The concept of the national language is 
central, but without the practice of a national culture--from slogans to 
pamphlets and newspapers, from folktales and heroes to epic poetry, novels, 
and drama-the language is inert; national culture organizes and sustains 
communal memory, as when early defeats in African resistance stories are 
resumed ("they took our weapons in r9o3; now we are taking them back'); 
it reinhabits the landscape using restored ways of life, heroes, heroines, and 
exploits; it formulates expressions and emotions of pride as well as defiance, 
which in·tum form the backbone of the principal national independence 
parties. Local slave narratives, spiritual autobiographies, prison memoirs 
form a counterpoint to the Western powers' monumental histories, official 
discourses, and panoptic quasi-scientific viewpoint. In Egypt, fot: example, 
the historical novels of Girgi Zaydan bring together for the first time a 
specifically Arab narrative (rather the way Walter Scott did a century 
before). In Spanish America, according to Anderson, creole communities 216 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
"produced creoles who consciously redefined these [mixed] populations as 
fellow nationals." 64 Both Anderson and Hannah Arendt note the widespread 
global movement to "achieve solidarities on an essentially imagined basis." 65 
Second is the idea that resistance, far from being merely a reaction to 
imperialism, is an alternative way-of conceiving human history. It i~ particu­
larly important to see how much this alternative reconception is based on 
breaking down the barriers between cultures. Certainly, as the title of a 
fascinating book has it, writing back to the metropolitan cultures, disrupting 
the European narratives of the Orient and Africa, replacing them with either 
a more playful or a more powerful new narrative style is a major component 
in the process. 66 Salman Rushdie's novel Midnight's Children is a brilliant 
work based on the liberating imagination of independence itself, with all 
its anomalies and contradictions working themselves out. The conscious 
effort to enter into the discourse of Europe and the West, to mix with it, 
transform it, to make it acknowledge marginalized or suppressed or forgot­
ten histories is of particular interest in Rushdie's work, and in an earlier 
generation of resistance writing. This kind of work was carried out by 
dozens of scholars, critics, and intellectuals in the peripheral world; I call 
this effort the voyage in. 
Third is a noticeable pull away from separatist nationalism toward a more 
integrative view of human community and human liberation. I want to be 
very clear about this. No one needs to be reminded that throughout the 
imperial world during the decolonizing period, protest, resistance, and inde­
pendence movements were fuelled by one or another nationalism. Debates 
today about Third World nationalism have been increasing in volume and 
interest, not least because to many scholars and observers in the West, this 
reappearance of nationalism revived several anachronistic _attitudes; Elie 
Kedourie, for example, considers non-Western nationalism essentially con­
demnable, a negative reaction to a demonstrated cultural and social inferior­
ity, an imitation of"Western" political behavior that brought little that was 
good; others, like Eric Hobsbawm and Ernest Gellner, consider nationalism 
as a form of political behavior that has been gradually superseded by new 
trans-national realities of modern economies, electronic communications, 
and superpower military projectionP In all these views, I believe, there is 
a marked (and, in my opinion, ahistorical) discomfort with non-Western 
societies acquiring national independence, which is believed to be "foreign" 
to their ethos. Hence the repeated insistence on the Western provenance of 
nationalist philosophies that are therefore ill-suited to, and likely to be 
abused by Arabs, Zulus, Indonesians, Irish; or Jamaicans. 
This, I think, is a criticism of newly independent peoples that carries with 
it a broadly cultural opposition (from the Left as well as from the Right) to Themes of Resistance Culture 217 
the proposition that the formerly subject peoples are entitled to the same 
kind of nationalism as, say, the more developed, hence more deserving, 
Germans or Italians. A confused and limiting notion of priority allows that 
only the original proponents of an idea can understand and use it. But the 
history of all cultures is the history of cultural borrowings. Cultures are not 
impermeable; just as Western science borrowed from Arabs, they had bor­
rowed from India and Greece. Culture is never just a matter of ownership, 
of borrowing and lending with absolute debtors and creditors, but rather of 
appropriations, common experiences, and interdependencies of all kinds 
among different cultures. This is a universal norm. Who has yet determined 
how much the domination of others contributed to the enormous wealth of 
the English and French states? 
A more interesting critique of non-Western nationalism comes from the 
Indian scholar and theoretician Partha Chatterjee (a member of the Subal­
tern Studies group). Much nationalist thought in India, he says, depends 
upon the realities of colonial power, either in totally opposing it or in 
affirming a patriotic consciousness. This "leads inevitably to an elitism of the 
intelligentsia, rooted in the vision of a radical regeneration of national 
culture." 68 To restore the nation in such a situation is basically to dream a 
romantically utopian ideal, which is undercut by the political reality. Ac­
cording to Chatterjee, the radical milestone in nationalism was reached in 
Gandhi's opposition to modem civilization entirely: influenced by anti­
modern thinkers like Ruskin and Tolstoi, Gandhi stands epistemically 
outside the thematic of post-Enlightenm~nt thought. 69 Nehru's accomplish­
ment was to take the Indian nation as liberated from modernity by Gandhi 
and deposit it entirely within the concept of the state. "The world of the 
concrete, the world of differences, of conflict, of the struggle between classes, 
of history and politics, now finds its unity in the life of the state." 70 
Chatterjee shows that successful anti-imperialist nationalism has a history 
of evasion and avoidance, and that nationalism can become a panacea for 
not dealing with economic disparities, social injustice, and the capture of the 
newly independent state by a nationalist elite. But he does not emphasize 
enough, I think, that the culture's contribution to statism is often the result 
of a separatist, even chauvinist and authoritarian conception of nationalism. 
There is also, however, a consistent intellectual trend within the nationalist 
consensus that is vitally critical, that refuses the shon-term blandishments 
of separatist and triumpha!'ist slogans in favor of the larger, more generous 
human realities of community among cultures, peoples, and societies. This 
community is the real human liberation portended by the resistance _!o 
imperialism. Basil Davidson makes roughly the same point in his magisterial 
book Africa in Modern History: The Search for a New Society. 71 218 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
I do not wane co be misunderstood as advocating a simple anti-nationalist 
position. It is historical fact that nationalism-restoration of community, 
assertion of identity, emergence of new cultural practices--as a mobilized 
political force instigated and then advanced the struggle against Western 
domination everywhere in the non-European world. It is no more useful to 
oppose that than to oppose Newton's discovery of gravity. Whether it was 
the Philippines, or any number of African territories, or the Indian subconti­
nent, the Arab world, or the Caribbean and much of Latin America, China 
or Japan, natives banded together in independence and nationalist groupings 
that were based on a sense of identity which was ethnic, religious, or 
communal, and was opposed to further Western encroachment. That hap­
pened from the beginning. It became a global reality in the twentieth 
century because it was so widespread a reaction to the Western incursion, 
which had also become extraordinarily widespread; with few exceptions 
people banded together in asserting their resistance to what they perceived 
was an unjust practice against them, mainly for being what they were, i.e., 
non-Western. Certainly it was the case that these groupings were at times 
fiercely exclusivist, as many historians of nationalism have shown. But we 
must also focus on the intellectual and cultural argument within the nation­
alist resistance that once independence was gained new and imaginative 
reconceptions of society and culture were required in order to avoid the old 
orthodoxies and injustices. 
The women's movement is central here. For as primary resistance gets 
under way, to be followed by fully 1ledged nationalist parties, unfair male 
practices like concubinage, polygamy, foot-binding, 111ti, and virtual enslave­
ment become the focal points of women's resistance. In Egypt, Turkey, 
Indonesia, China, and Ceylon the early-twentieth-century struggle for the 
emancipation of womeo is organically related to nationalist agitation. Raja 
Ramuhan Roy, an early-nineteenth-century nationalist influenced by Mary 
W ollstonecraft, mobilized the early campaign for Indian women's rights, a 
common pattern in the colonized world, where the first intellectual stirrings 
against injustice included attention to the abused rights of all oppressed 
classes. Later women writers and intellectuals--often from privileged 
classes and often in alliance with Western apostles of women's rights like 
Annie Besant--came to the forefront of agitation for women's education. 
Kumari Jayawardena's central work Feminitm and Nationalinn in the Third 
World describes the efforts oflndian reformers like Tora Duct, D. K. Karve, 
and Cornelia Sorabjee, and of militants such as Pundita Ramabai. Their 
counterparts in the Philippines, Egypt (Huda Shaarawi), Indonesia (Raden 
Kartini) broadened the stream of what became feminism, which after inde­
pendence became one of the main liberlltionist tendencies.n Themes of Resistance Culture 219 
This larger search for liberation was most in evidence where the national­
ist accomplishment had been either checked or greatly delayed-in Algeria, 
Guinea, Palestine, sections of the Islamic and Arab world, and South Africa. 
Students of post-colonial politics have not, I think, looked enough at the 
ideas that minimize orthodoxy and authoritarian or patriarchal thought, that 
take a severe view of the coercive nature of identity politics. Perhaps this is 
because the Idi Amins and Saddam Husseins of the Third World have 
hijacked nationalism so completely and in so ghastly a manner. That many 
nationalists are sometimes more coercive or more intellectually self-critical 
than others is clear, but my own thesis is that, at its best, nationalist resis­
tance to imperialism was always critical of itself. An attentive reading of 
towering figures within the nationalist ranks--writers like C.LR. James, 
Neruda, Tagore himself, Fanon, Cabral, and others--discriminates among 
the various forces vying for ascendancy within the anti-imperialist, national­
ist camp.James is a perfect case in point Long a champion of Black national­
ism, he always tempered his advocacy with disclaimers and reminders that 
assertions of ethnic particularity were not enough, just as solidarity without 
criticism was not enough. There is a great deal of hope to be derived from 
this if only because, far from being at the end of history; we are in a position 
to do something about our own present and future history, whether we live 
inside or outside the metropolitan world. 
In sum, decolonization is a very complex battle over the course of differ­
ent political destinies, different histories and geographies, and it is replete 
with works of the imagination, scholarship and counter-scholarship. The 
struggle took the form of strikes, marches, violent attack, retribution and 
counter-retribution. Its fabric is also made up of novelists and colonial 
officials writing about the nature of the Indian mentality, for example, of the 
land rent schemes of Bengal, of the struCture of Indian society; and, in 
response, of Indians writing novels about a greater share in their rule, 
intellectuals and orators appealing to the masses for greater commitments to 
and mobilization for independence. 
One cannot put timetables or fixed dates on this. India followed one 
course, Burma another, West Africa another, Algeria still another, Egypt, 
Syria, and Senegal still others. But in all cases one sees the gradually more 
and more perceptible divisions between the massive national blocks: t~e 
West-France, Britain, Holland, Belgium, Germany, etc.--on one side, 
most of the natives on the other. Generally speaking therefore anti-imperial­
ist resistance builds gradually from sporadic and often unsuccessful revolts 
until after World War One it erupts variously in major parties, movements, 
and personalities all over the empire; for three decades after World War 
Two, it becomes more militantly independence-minded and yields up the 220 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
new states in Africa and Asia. In the process it permanently changes the 
internal situation of the Western powers, which divided into opponents and 
supporters of the imperial policy. 
( III ) 
Yeats and Decoloni"zation 
W illiam Buder Yeats has now been almost completely assimilated into 
the canon as well as into the discourses of modern English literature 
and European high modernism. Both these reckon with him as a great 
modem Irish poet, deeply affiliated and interacting with his native traditions, 
the historical and political context of his times, and the complex situation 
of being a poet writing in English in a turbulently nationalist Ireland. 
Despite Yeats's obvious and, I would say, settled presence in Ireland, in 
British culture and literature, and in European modernism, he does present 
another fascinating aspect: that of the indisputably great nationtd poet who 
during a period of anti-imperialist resistance articulates the experiences, the 
aspirations, and the restorative vision of a people suffering under the domin­
ion of an offshore power. 
From this perspective Yeats is a poet who belongs in a tradition not 
usually considered his, that of the colonial world ruled by European imperi­
alism during a climactic insurrectionary stage. If this is not a customary way 
of interpreting Yeats, then we need to say that he also belongs naturally to 
the cultural domain, his by virtue oflreland's colonial status, which it shares 
with a host of non-European regions: cultural dependency and antagonism 
together. 
The high age of imperialism is said to have begun in the late 187os, but 
in English-speaking realms, it began well over seven hundred years before, 
· as Angus Calder's gripping book Revolutionary Empire demonstrates so well. 
Ireland was ceded by the Pope to Henry II ofEngland in the usos; he himself 
came to Ireland in II7L From that rime on an amazingly persistent cultural 
attitude existed toward Ireland as a place whose inhabitants were a barbarian 
and degenerate race. Recent critics and historian~Seamus Deane, Nicho­
las Canny, Joseph Leerson, and R. N. Lebow among other~have studied 
and documented this history, to whose formation such impressive figures as 
Edmund Spenser and David Hume contributed in very large measure. 
Thus India, North Africa, the Caribbean, Central and South America, Yeats anti Decolonization 2.21 
many pans of Africa, China and Japan, the Pacific archipelago, Malaysia, 
Australia, New Zealand, North America, and of course Ireland belong in a 
group together, although most of the time they are treated separately. All of 
them were sites of contention well before 187o, either between various local 
tesistance groups, or between the European powers themselves; in some 
cases, India and Africa, for instance, th~ two struggles against outside domi­
nation were going on simultaneously long before 1857, and long before the 
various European congresses on Africa at the end of the century. 
The point here is that no matter how one wishes ·to demarcate high 
imperialism-that period when nearly everyone in Europe and America 
believed him or herself to be serving the high civilizational and commer­
cial cause of empire-imperialism itself had already been a continuous 
process for several centuries of overseas conquest, rapacity, and scientific 
exploration. For an Indian, or Irishman, or Algerian, the land was and 
had been dominated by an alien power, whether liberal, monarchical, or 
revolutionary. 
But modern European imperialism was a constitutively, radically differ­
ent type of overseas domination from all earlier forms. Scale and scope were 
only part of the difference, though certainly not Byzantium, or Rome, or 
Athens, or Baghdad, or Spain and Portugal during the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries controlled anything like the size of the territories controlled by 
Britain and France in the nineteenth century. The more important differ­
ences are first the sustained longevity of the disparity in power, and second, 
the massive organization of the power, which atfected the details and not just 
the large outlines oflife. By the early nineteenth century, Europe had begun 
the industrial transformation of its economies-Britain leading the way; 
feudal and traditional landholding structures were changing; new mercantil­
ist patterns of overseas trade, naval power, and colonialist settlement were 
being established; the bourgeois revolution was entering its triumphant 
stage. All these developments gave Europe a further ascendancy over its 
offshore possessions, a profile of imposing and even daunting power. By the 
beginning of World War One, Europe and America held most of the earth's 
surface in some sort of colonial subjugation. 
This came about for many reasons, which a whole library of systematic 
studies (beginning with those by critics of imperialism during its most 
aggressive phase such as Hobson, Rosa Luxemburg, and Lenin) has ascribed 
to largely economic and somewhat ambiguously characterized political pro­
cesses (in the case of joseph Schumpeter, psychologically aggressive ones as 
well). The theory I advance in this book is that culture played a very 
important, indeed indispensable role. At the heart of European culture 
during the many decades of imperial expansion lay an undeterred and RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
unrelenting Eurocentrism. This accumulated experiences, territories, peo­
ples, histories; it smdied them, it classified them, it verified them, and as 
Calder says, it allowed "European men of business" the power "to scheme 
grandly"; 73 but above all, it subordinated them by banishing their identities, 
except as a lower order of being, from the culmre and indeed the very idea 
of white Christian Europe. This culmral process has to be seen as a vital, 
informing, and invigorating counterpoint to the economic and political 
machinery at the material center of imperialism. This Eurocentric culmre 
relentlessly codified and observed everything about the non-European or 
peripheral world, and so thoroughly and in so detailed a manner as to leave 
few items untouched, few culrures unsmdied, few peoples and spots of land 
unclaimed. 
From these views there was hardly any significant divergence from the 
Renaissance on, and if it is embarrassing for us to remark that those elements 
of a society we have long considered to be progressive were, so far as empire 
was concerned, uniformly retrograde, we still must not be afraid to say it 
Advanced writers and anists, the working class, and women--groups mar­
ginal in the West--showed an imperialist fervor that increased in intensity 
and perfervid enthusiasm as the competition among various European and 
American powers increased in brutality and senseless, even profitless, con­
trol. Eurocentrism penetrated to the core of the workers' movement, the 
women's movement, the avant-garde arts movement, leaving no one of 
significance untouched. 
As imperialism increased in scope and in depth, so too, in the colonies 
themselves, the resistance mounted. Just as in Europe the global accumula­
tion that gathered the colonial domains into the world market economy was 
supponed and enabled by a culmre giving empire ideological license, so in 
the overseas imperium the massive political, economic, and military resis­
tance was carried forward and informed by an actively provocative and 
challenging culmre of resistance. This was a culrure with a long tradition of 
integrity and power in its own right, not simply a belated reactive response 
to Western imperialism. 
In Ireland, Calder says, the idea of murdering Gaels was from the stan "as 
pan of a royal ·army or with royal approval, [considered] patriotic, heroic 
and just."74 The idea of English racial superiority became ingrained; so 
humane a poet and gentleman as Edmund Spenser in his View of the Prerent 
State of Ireland (1596) was boldly proposing that since the Irish were barbarian 
Scythians, most of them should be exterminated. Revolts against the English 
naturally began early, and by the eighteenth cenrury under Wolfe Tone and 
Grattan the opposition had acquired an identity of its own, with organiza­
tions, idioms, rules. "Patriotism was coming into vogue" 75 during mid-Yeats and Decolonization 
century, Calder continues, which, with the extraordinary talents of Swift, 
Goldsmith, and Burke, gave Irish resistance a discourse entirely its own. 
Much but by no means all the resistance to imperialism was conducted in 
the broad context of nationalism. "Nationalism" is a word that still signifies all 
sorts of undifferentiated things, but it serves me quire adequately to identify 
the mobilizing force that coalesced into resistance against an alien and 
occupying empire on the pan of peoples possessing a common history, 
religion, and language. Yet for all its succ~indeed because ofits success­
in ridding many territories of colonial overlords, nationalism has remained a 
deeply problematic enterprise. When it got people out on the·streets to march 
against the white master, nationalism was often led by lawyers,· doctol's, and 
writers who were panly formed and to some degree produced by the colonial 
power. The national bourgeoisies and their specialized elites, of which F anon 
speaks so ominously, in effect tended to replace the colonial force with a new 
class-based and ultimately exploitative one, which replicated the old colonial 
structures in new terms. There are states all across the formerly colonized 
world that have bred pathologies of power, as Eqbal Ahmad has called them.76 
Also, the cultural horizons of a nationalism may be fatally limited by the 
common history it presumes of colonizer and colonized. Imperialism after all 
was a cooperative venture; and a salient trait of its modem form is that it was 
(or claimed to be) an educational movement; it set out quite consciously to 
modernize, develop, instruct, and civilize. The annals of schools, missions, 
universities, scholarly societies, hospitals in Asia, Africa, Latin America, 
Europe, and America are filled with this history, which over time established 
so-called modernizing trends as much as it muted the harsher aspects of 
imperialist domination. But at its center it preserved the nineteenth-century 
divide between native and Westerner. 
The great colonial schools, for example, taught generations of the native 
bourgeoisie imponant truths about history, science, culture. Out of that 
learning process millions grasped the fundamentals of modern life, yet 
remained subordinate dependents of an authority based elsewhere than in 
their lives. Since one of the purposes of colonial education was to promote the 
. history of France or Britain, that same education also demoted the native 
history. Thus for the native, there were always the Englands, Frances, 
Germanys, Hollands as distant repositories of the Word, despite the affinities 
developed between native and "white man" during the years of productive 
collaboration. Joyce's Stephen Dedalus as he faces his English director of 
studies is a famous example of someone who discovers this with unusual force: 
The language we are speaking is his before it is mine. How different are · 
. the words home, Christ, ale, master, on his lips and on mine! I cannot speak RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
or write these ~ords without unrest of spirit. His language, so familiar 
and so foreign, will always be for me an acquired speech. I have not 
made or accepted its words. My voice holds them at bay. My soul frets 
in the shadow of his language. 77 
Nationalism in Ireland, India, and Egypt, for example, was rooted in the 
long-standing struggle for native rights and independence by nationalist 
patties like the Sinn Fein, Congress, and Wafd. Similar processes occurred 
in other parts of Africa and Asia. Nehru, Nasser 1 Sukarno, Nyerere, Nkru­
mah: the pantheon of Bandung flourished, in all its suffering and greatness, 
because of the nationalist dynamic, which was culturally embodied in the 
inspirational autobiographies, instructional manuals, and philosophical 
meditations of these great ·nationalist leaders. An unmistakable patriarchal 
cast can be discerned everywhere in classical nationalism, with delays and 
distonions in women's and minority rights (to say nothing of democratic 
freedoms) that are still perceptible today. Crucial works like Panikar's Asia 
and Western Dominance, George Antonius's The Arab Awakmin~ and the 
various works of the Irish Revival were also produced out of classical 
nationalism. 
Within the nationalist revival, in Ireland and elsewhere, there were two 
distinct political moments, each with its own imaginative culture, the second 
unthinkable without the first. The first was a pronounced awareness of 
European and Western culture 111 imperialism; this reflexive moment of 
consciousness enabled the African, Caribbean, Irish, Latin American, or 
Asian citizen to assen the end of Europe's cultural claim to guide and/or 
instruct the non-European or non-mainland individual. Often this was first 
done, as Thomas Hodgkin has argued, by "prophets and priests," 78 among 
them poets and visionaries, versions perhaps of Hobsbawm's "primitive 
rebels." The second more openly liberationist moment occurred during the 
dramatically prolonged Western imperial mission after World War Two in 
various colonial regions, principally Algeria, Vietnam, Palestine, Ireland, 
Guinea, and Cuba. Whether in the Indian constitution, or in statements of 
Pan-Arabism and Pan-Africanism, or in its particularist forms ·such as 
Pearse's Gaelic or Senghor's negritude, conventional nationalism was re­
vealed to be both insufficient and crucial, but only as a first step. Out of this 
paradox comes the idea of liberation, a strong new post-nationalist theme 
that had been implicit in the works of Connolly, Garvey, Marti, Mariategi, 
Cabral, and Du Bois, for instance, but required the propulsive infusion of 
theory and even of armed, insurrectionary militancy to bring it forward 
clearly. 
Let us look again at the literature of the first of these moments, that of Yeat.f and Decolonization 
anti-imperialist resistance. If there is anything that radically distinguishes 
the imagination of anti-imperialism, it is the primacy of the geographical 
element. Imperialism after all is an act of geographical violence through 
which virtually every space in the world is explored, charted, and finally 
brought under control. For the native, the history of colonial servitude is 
inaugurated by loss of the locality to the outsider; its geographical identity 
must thereafter be searched for and somehow restored. Because of the 
presence of the colonizing outsider, .the land is recoverable at first only 
through the imagination. 
Let me give three examples of how imperialism's complex yet firm geo­
graphical morte main moves from the general ·to the specific. The most 
general is presented in Crosby's Ecological Imperialism. Crosby says that wher­
ever they went Europeans immediately began to change the local habitat; 
their conscious aim was to transform territories into images of what they had 
left behind. This process was never-ending, as a huge number of plants, 
animals, and crops as well as building methods gradually turned the colony 
into a new place, complete with new diseases, environmental imbalances, 
and traumatic dislocations for the overpowered natives. 79 A changed ecology 
also introduced a changed political system. In the eyes of the later nationalist 
poet or visionary, this alienated the people from their authentic traditions, 
ways of life, and political organizations. A great deal of romantic mythmak­
ing went into these nationalist versions of how imperialism alienated the 
land, but we must not doubt the extent of the actual changes wrought. 
A second example is the rationalizing projects oflong-standing territorial 
poss~ssion, which seek routinely to make land profitable and at the same 
time to integrate it with an external rule. In his book Uneven Development the 
geographer Neil Smith brilliantly formulates how capitalism historically has 
produced a particular kind of nature and space, an unequally developed 
landscape that integrates poverty with wealth, industrial urbanization with 
agricultural diminishment. The culmination of this process is imperialism, 
which dominates, classifies, and universally commodifies all space under the 
aegis of the metropolitan center. Its cultural analogue is late-nineteenth­
century commercial geography, whose perspectives (for example in the 
work of Mackinder and Chisolm) justified imperialism as the result of 
"naturaJ" fertility or infertility, available sea-lanes, permanently differenti­
ated zones, territories, climates, and peoples. 80 Thus is accomplished "the 
universality of capitalism," which is "the differentiation of national space 
according to the territorial division of labor." 81 
Following Hegel, Marx, and Lukacs, Smith calls the production of this 
scientifically "natural" world a second nature. To the anti-imperialist imagi­
nation, our space at home in the peripheries has been usurped and put to use ' 
2.2.6 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
by outsiders for their purpose. It is therefore necessary to seek out, to map, 
to invent, or to discover a third nature, not pristine and pre-historical 
("Romantic Ireland's dead and gone," says Yeats) but deriving from the 
deprivations of the present. The impulse is cartographic, and among its most 
striking examples are Yeats's early poems collected in "The Rose," Neruda's 
various poems charting the Chilean landscape, Cesaire on the Antilles, Faiz 
on Pakistan, and Darwish on Palestine-
Restore to me the color of face 
And the warmth of body, 
The light of heart and eye, 
The salt of bread and earth ... the Motherland. az 
But-a third example-colonial space must be transformed sufficiently so 
as no longer to appear foreign to the imperial eye. More than any other of 
its colonies, Britain's Ireland was subjected to innumerable metamorphoses 
through repeated settling projects and, in culmination, its virtual incorpora­
tion in t8ox through the Act of Union. Thereafter an Ordnance Survey of 
Ireland was ordered in 1814 whose goal was to anglicize the names, redraw 
the land boundaries to permit valuation of property (and further expropria­
tion ofland in favor of English and "seignorial" families), and permanently 
subjugate the population. The survey was carried out almost entirely by 
English personnel, which, as Mary Hamer has cogently argued, had the 
"immediate effect of defining the Irish as incompetent [and] ... depress[ing 
their] national achievement." 83 One of Brian Friel's most powerful plays, 
Translations ( 198o ), deals with the shattering effect of the Ordnance Survey 
on the indigenous inhabitants. "In such a process," Hamer continues, "the 
colonized is typically [supposed to be] passive and spoken for, does not 
control its own representation but is represented in accordance with a 
hegemonic impulse by which it is constructed as a stable and unitary en­
tity."84 And what was done in Ireland was also done in Bengal or, by the 
French, in Algeria. 
One of the first tasks of the culture of resistance was to reclaim, rename, 
and reinhabit the land. And with that came a whole set of further assertions, 
recoveries, and identifications, all of them quite literally grounded on this 
poetically projected base. The search for authenticity, for a more congenial 
national origin than that provided by colonial history, for a new pantheon 
of heroes and (occasionally) heroines, myths, and religions-these too are 
made possible by a sense of the land reappropriated by its people. And along 
with these nationalistic adumbrations of the decolonized identity, there Yeats and DecoloniZiltion 
always goes an almost magically inspired, quasi-alchemical redevelopment 
of the native language. 
Yeats is especially interesting here. With Caribbean and some African 
writers he expresses the predicament of sharing a language with the colonial 
overlord, and of course he belongs in many important ways to the Protestant 
Ascendancy, whose Irish loyalties were confused, to put it mildly, if not in 
his case quite contradictory. There is a fairly logical progression from Yeats's 
early Gaelicism, with its Celtic preoccupations and themes, to his later 
systematic mythologies as set down in programmatic poems like "Ego Do­
minus Tuus" and in the treatise A Vision. For Yeats the overlapping he knew 
existed of his Irish nationalism with the English cultural heritage, which 
both dominated and empowered him, was bound to cause tension, and one 
may speculate that it was the pressure of this urgently political and secular 
tension that caused him to try to resolve it on a "higher," that is, non­
political level. The deeply eccentric and aestheticized histories he produced 
in A Vision and the later quasi-religious poems elevate the tension to an 
extra-worldly level, as iflreland were best taken over, so to speak, at a level 
above that of the ground. 
Seamus Deane, in Celtic Revivals, the most interesting and brilliant account 
of yeats's super-terrestrial idea of revolution, has suggested that Yeats's 
early and invented Ireland was "amenable to his imagination ... [whereas] 
he ended by finding an Ireland recalcitrant to it." Whenever Yeats tried to 
reconcile his occultist views with an actual Ireland-as in "The Statues"­
the results are strained, Deane says correctly. 85 Because Yeats's Ireland was 
a ~volurionary country, he could use its backwardness as a source for a 
radically disturbing, disruptive return to spiritual ideals lost in an over­
developed modern Europe. In such dramatic realities as the Easter 1916 
uprising, Yeats also saw the breaking of a cycle of endless, perhaps finally 
meaningless recurrence, as symbolized by the apparently limitless travails of 
Cuchulain. Deane's theory is that the birth of an Irish national identity 
coincides for Yeats with the breaking of the cycle, although it also under­
scores, and reinforces in Yeats himself, the colonialist British attitude of a 
specific Irish national character. Thus Yeats's return to mysticism and his 
recourse to fascism, Deane says perceptively, underline. the colonial predica­
ment also expressed, for example, in V. S. Naipaul's representations oflndia, 
that of a culture indebted to the mother country for its own self and for a 
sense of"Englishness" and yet turning toward the colony: "such a search for 
a national signature becomes colonial, on account of the different histories 
of the two islands. The greatest flowering of such a search has been Yeats's 
poetry." 86 Far from representing an outdated nationalism, Yeats's wilful 228 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
mysticism and incoherence embody a revolutionary potential, and the poet 
insists "that Ireland should retain its culture by keeping awake its conscious­
ness of metaphysical questions," as Deane puts it.87 In a world from which 
the harsh strains of capitalism have removed thought and reflection, a poet 
who can stimulate a sense of the eternal and of death into consciousness is 
the true rebel, a figure whose colonial diminishments spur him to a negative 
apprehension of his society and of "civilized~' modernity. 
This rather Adorno-esque formulation of Yeats's quandary is of course 
powerfully attractive. Yet perhaps it is weakened by its wanting to render 
Yeats more heroic than a crudely political reading would have suggested, 
and excuse his unacceptable and indigestible reactionary politics-his out­
right fascism, his fantasies of old homes and families, his incoherently occult 
divagations-by translating them into an instance of Adorno's "negative 
dialectic." As a small corrective, we might more accurately see Yeats as an 
exacerbated example of the nativist phenomenon which flourished else­
where (e.g., negritude) as a result of the colonial encounter. 
True, the physical, geographical connections are closer between England 
and Ireland than between England and India, or between France and Algeria 
or Senegal. But the imperial relationship is there in all cases. Irish people can 
never be English any more than Cambodians or Algerians can be French. 
This it seems to me was always the case in every colonial relationship, 
because it is the first principle that a clear-cut and absolute hierarchical 
distinction should remain constant between ruler and ruled, whether or not 
the latter is white. Nativism, alas, reinforces the distinction even while 
revaluating the weaker or subservient partiler. And it has often led to 
compelling but demagogic assertions about a native past, narrative or actual­
ity that stands free from worldly time itsel£ One sees this in such enterprises 
as Senghor's negritude, or in the Rastafarian movement, or in the Garveyite 
back to Mrica project for American Blacks, or in the rediscoveries of various 
unsullied, pre-colonial Muslim essences. 
The tremendous ressentiment in nativism aside (for example, in Jalal Ali 
Ahmad's Occidentosis, an influential Iranian tract published in 1978 that blames 
the West for most evils in the world), there are two reasons for rejecting, ot: 
at least reconceiving, the nativist enterprise. To say, as D~ane does, that it 
is incoherent and yet, by its negation of politics and history, also heroically 
revolutionary seems to me is to fall into the nativist position as if it were the 
only choice for a resisting, decolonizing nationalism. But we have evidence 
of its ravages: to accept nativism is to accept the consequences of imperial­
ism, the racial, religious, and political divisions imposed by imperialism 
itsel£ To leave the historical world for the metaphysics of essences like 
negritude, Irishness, Islam, or Catholicism is to abandon history for essentiali-Yeats and Decolonization 229 
zations that have the power to turn human beings against each other; often 
this abandonment of the secular world has led to a sort of millenarianism if 
the movement has had a mass base, or it has degenerated into small-scale 
private craziness, or into an unthinking acceptance of stereotypes, myths, 
animosities, and traditions encouraged by imperialism. Such programs are 
hardly what great resistance movements had imagined as their goals. 
A useful way of getting a better hold of this analytically is to look at an 
analysis of the same problem done in the Mrican context: Wole Soyinka's 
withering critique of negritude published in 1976. Soyinka notes that the 
concept of negritude is the second, inferior term in an opposition-European 
versus African-that "accepted the dialectical structure of European ideo­
logical confrontations but borrowed from the very components of its racist 
syllogism." 88 Thus Evropeans are analytical, Mricans "incapable of analyti­
cal thought. Therefore the African is not highly developed" whereas the 
European is. The result is, according to Soyinka, that 
negritude trapped itself in what was primarily a defensive role, even 
though its accents were strident, its syntax hyperbolic and its strategy 
aggressive .... Negritude stayed within a pre-set system of Eurocentric 
, intellectual analysis of both man and his society, and tried to re-define 
the African and his society in those externalized terms. 89 
We are left with the paradox that Soyinka himself articulates, that (he has 
Fanon in mind) adoring the Negro is as "sick" as abominating him. And 
while it is impossible to avoid the combative, assertive early stages in the 
nativist identity-they always occur: Yeats's early poetry is not only about 
Ireland, but about Irishness-there is a good deal of promise in getting 
beyond them, not remaining trapped in the emotional self-indulgence of 
celebrating one's own identity. There is first of all the possibility of discover­
ing a world not constructed out of warring essences. Second, there is the 
possibility of a universalism that is not limited or coercive, which believing 
that all people have only one single identity is-that all the Irish are only 
Irish, Indians Indians, Mricans Africans, and so on ad nauseam. Third, and 
most important, moving beyond nativism does not mean abandoning nation­
ality, but it does mean thinking of local identity as not exhaustive, and 
therefor~ not being anxious to confine oneself to one's own sphere, with its 
ceremonies of belonging, its built-in chauvinism, and its limiting sense of 
security. 
Nationality, nationalism, nativism: the progression is, I believe, more and 
more constraining. In countries like Algeria and Kenya one can watch the 
heroic resistance of a community partly formed out of colonial degradations, RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
leading to a protracted armed and cultural conflict with the imperial powers, 
in tum giving way to a one-party state with dictatorial rule and, in the case 
of Algeria, an uncompromising Islamic fundamentalist opposition. The 
debilitating despotism of the Moi regime in Kenya can scarcely be said to 
complete the liberationist currents of the Mau Mau uprising. No transfor­
mation of social consciousness here, but only an appalling pathology of 
power duplicated elsewhere--in the Philippines, Indonesia, Pakistan, Zaire, 
Morocco, Iran. 
In any case nativism is not the only alternative. There is the possibility of 
a more generous and pluralistic vision of the world, in which imperialism 
courses on, as it were, belatedly in different forms (the North-South polarity 
of our own time is one), and the relationship of domination continues, but 
· the opportunities for liberation are open. Even though there was an Irish 
Free State by the end of his life in 1939, Yeats partially belonged to this 
second moment, as shown by his sustained anti-British sentiment and the 
anger and gaiety of his anarchically disturbing last poetry. In this phase 
liberation, and not nationalist independence, is the new alternative, liberation 
which by its very nature involves, in Fanon's words, a transformation of 
social consciousness beyond national'consciousness. 90 
Looking at it from this perspective, then, Yeats's slide into incoherence 
and mysticism during the 192.os, his rejection of politics, and his arrogant if 
charming espousal of fascism (or authoritarianism of an Italian or South 
American kind) are not to be excused, not too quickly to be dialecticized 
into the negative utopian mode. For one can quite easily situate and criticize 
those unacceptable attitudes of Yeats without changing one's view of Yeats 
as a poet of decolonization. 
This way beyond nativism is figured in the great turn at the climax of 
Cesaire's Cahier d'un retour when the poet realizes that, after rediscovering 
and re-experiencing his past, after re-entering the passions, horrors, and 
circumstances of his history as a Black, after feeling and then emptying 
himself of his anger, after accepting-
J'accepte ... j'accepte ... entierement, sans reseroe 
ma race qu'aucune ablution d'hypsope et de lys m~lis ne pourrait purifier 
ma race rongee de macule 
ma race raisin mur pour pieds ivres91 
(I accept ... I accept ... totally, witho.ut reseroation 
my race that no ablution of hyssop mixed with lilies could purifY 
my race pitted with blemishes 
my race a ripe grape for drunken feet) Yeats and Decolonization 
-after all this he is suddenly assailed by strength and life "comme un 
taureau," and begins to understand that 
it n 'm point vrai que I 'oeuvre de l'homme e.rt finie 
que nou.r n 'avon.r rien a foire au monde 
que nou.r para.riton.r le monde 
qu 'it .ruJ!it que nou.r nou.r mettion.r au pa.r du monde 
mai.r /'oeuvre de l'homme vient .reulment de commencer 
et it reste a l'homme a conqumr toute interdiction 
immobili.ree aux coin.r de .ra ferveur et aucune race 
ne pos.rede le monopole de Ia beauti, de /'intelligence, de Ia force 
et it e.rt place pour tou.r au rendez-vou.r de Ia conqtdte 
et nou.r .ravon.r maintenant que le .roleil toume 
autour de notre terre lclairant Ia parcelle qu 'a fixe 
notre volonte .reule et que toute ltoile chute de ciel 
en terre·a notre commandement .ran.r limite.92 
(for it i.r not true that the work of man i.r done 
that we have no bu.rine.r.r being on earth 
that we para.rite the world 
that it i.r enough for u.r to heel to the world 
whereat .the work ha.r only begun 
and man .rtill mu.rt overcome all the interdiction! 
wedged in the rece.r.re.r of hi.r fervor and no race ha.r a 
monopoly on beauty, on intelligence, on .rtrength 
and there i.r room for everyone at the convocation of 
conque.rt and we know now that the sun tum.r around our 
earth lighting the parcel de.rignated by our will alone 
and that every .rtar fall.r frum .rky to earth at our 
omnipotent commandJ 
The striking phrases are "a conquerir toute interdiction immobilisee aux 
coins de sa ferveur" and "le solei! ... eclairant Ia parcelle qu'a fixe notre 
volonre seule." You don't give in to the rigidity and interdictions of self­
imposed limitations that come with race, moment, or milieu; instead you 
move through them to an animated and expanded sense of"[le] rendez-vous 
de Ia conquete," which necessarily involves more than your Ireland, your 
Martinique, your Pakistan. 
I don't mean to use Cesaire again.rtYeats (or Seamus Deane's Yeats), but RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
rather more fully to associate a major strand in Yeats's poetry both with the 
poetry of decolonization and resistance, and with the historical alternatives 
to the nativist impasse. In many other ways Yeats is like other poets resisting 
imperialism-in his insistence on a new narrative for his people, his anger 
at England'nchemes for Irish partition (and enthusiasm for wholeness), the 
celebration and commemoration of violence in bringing about a new order, 
and the sinuous interweaving of loyalty and betrayal in the nationalist 
setting. Yeats's direct association with Parnell and O'Leary, with the Abbey 
Theatre, with the Easter Uprising, bring to his poetry what R. P. Blackmur, 
borrowing fromJung, calls "the terrible ambiguity of an immediate experi­
ence."93 Yeats's work of the early 1910s has an uncanny resemblance to the 
engagement and ambiguities of Darwish's Palestinian poetry half a century 
later, in its renderings of violence, of the overwhelming suddenness and 
surprises of historical events, of politics and poetry as opposed to violence 
and guns (see his marvelous lyric "The Rose and The Dictionary"), 94 of the 
search for respites after the last border has been crossed, the last sky flown 
in. "The holy centaurs of the hills are vanished," says Yeats, "I have nothing 
but the embittered sun." 
One feels in reading the great poems of that climactic period after the 
Easter Uprising of 1916, like "Nineteen Hundred and Nineteen" or "Easter 
1916," and "September 1913," not just the disappointments of life commanded 
by "the greasy till" or the violence of roads and horses, of "weasels fighting 
in a hole," or the rituals of what has been called Blood Sacrifice poetry, but 
also a terrible new beauty that changes the old political and moral landscape. 
Like all poets of decolonization, Yeats struggles to announce the contours 
of an imagined or ideal community, crystaJlized by its sense not only of itself 
but also of its enemy. "Imagined community" is apt here, so long as we are 
not obliged also to accept Benedict Anderson's mistakenly linear periodiza­
tions. In the cultural discourses of decolonization, a great many languages, 
histories, forms circulate. As Barbara Harlow has shown in Rerirtance Litm~­
ture, the instability of time, which has to be made and remade by the people 
and its leaders, is a theme one sees in all the genres-spiritual autobiogra­
phies, poems of protest, prison memoirs, didactic dramas of deliverance. The 
shifts in Yeats's accounts of his great cycles invoke this instability, as does 
the easy commerce in his poetry between popular and formal speech, folk­
tale and learned writing. The disquiet of what T. S. Eliot calls the "cunning 
history [and] contrived corridors" of time-the wrong turns, the overlap, the 
senseless repetition, the occasionally glorious moment-furnishes Yeats, as 
it does all the poets and men ofletrers of decolonization-- Tagore, Senghor, 
Cesaire-with stern mania! accents, heroism, and the grinding persistence Yeats and Decolonization 233 
of"the uncontrollable mystery on the bestial floor." Thus the writer rises out 
of his national environment and gains universal significance. 
In the first volum~ of his memoirs, Pablo Neruda speaks of a writers' 
congress in Madrid held in 1937 in defense of the Republic. "Priceless 
replies" to the invitations "poured in from all over. One was from Yeats, 
Ireland's national poet; another, from Selma Lagerlof, the notable Swedish 
writer. They were both too old to travel to a beleaguered city like Madrid, 
which was steadily being pounded by bombs, but they rallied to the defense 
of the Spanish Republic." 95 Just as Neruda saw no difficulty in thinking of 
himself as a poet who dealt both with internal colonialism in Chile and with 
external imperialism throughout Latin America, we should think of Yeats, 
I believe, as an Irish poet with more than strictly local Irish meaning and 
applications. Neruda accepted him as a national poet representing the Irish 
nation in its war against tyranny and, according to Neruda, Yeats responded 
positively to that unmistakably anti-fascist call, despite his frequently cited 
dispositions toward European fascism. 
The resemblance between Neruda's justly famous poem "El Pueblo" (in 
the 1961 collection Plenos Poderes, translated by Alastair Reid, whose version 
I have used, as FuJJy Empowered) and Yeats's "The Fisherman" is striking: in 
both poems the central figure is an anonymous man of the people, who in 
his strength and loneliness is a inute expression of the people, a quality that 
inspires the poet in his work. Yeats: 
Neruda: It's kmg since I began 
To call up to the eyes 
This wise and simple man. 
All day I'd look in the face 
What I bad hoped 'twould be 
To write for my own race 
And the reality. 96 
I knew that man, and when I could 
when I sti./1 bad eyes in my head, 
· when I still bad a voice in my throat, 
I sought him among the tombJ" and I said to him, · 
pressing his arm that still Wfl! not dust: 
"Everything wiD pa.r.r, you will .nil/ be living. 
You .ret fire to lift. RESISTANCE AND Oi'POSITION 
You made what is yours." 
So let no one be perturbed when 
I seem to be alone and am not alone; 
I am not without company and I speak for aD. 
Someone ir hearing me without knowing it, 
But those I sing of, those who know, 
go on being born and witl overflow the world. 97 
The poetic calling develops out of a pact made between people and poet; 
hence the power of such invocations to an actual poem as those provided by 
the figures both men seem to require. 
The chain does not stop there, since Neruda goes on (in "Deber del 
Poeta") to claim that "through me, freedom and the seafwill call in answer 
to the shrouded heart," and Yeats in "The Tower" speaks of sending imagi­
nation forth "and call[ing] images and memories/From ruin or from ancient 
trees." 98 Because such protocols of exhortati~n and expansiveness are an­
nounced from under the shadow of domination, we may connect them with 
the narrative ofliberation depicted so memorably in Fanon's Wretched of the 
Earth. For whereas the divisions and separations of the colonial order freeze 
the population's captivity into a sullen torpor, "new outlets ... engender 
aims for the violence of colonized peoples." 99 Fanon specifies the declara­
tions of rights, clamors for free speech and trades union demands; later, an 
entirely new history unfolds as a revolutionary class of militants, drawn from 
the ranks of the urban poor, outcasts, criminals, and declauis, takes to the 
countryside, there slowly to form cells of armed activists, who return to the 
city for the final stages of the insurgency. 
The extraordinary power of Fanon's writing is that it is presented as a 
surreptitious counter-narrative to the above-ground force of the colonial 
regime, which in the teleology ofF anon's narrative is certain to be defeated. 
The difference between Fanon and Yea~ is that Fanon's theoretical and 
perhaps even metaphysical narrative of anti-imperialist decolonization is 
marked throughout with the accents and inflections of liberation: this is far 
more than a ceactive native defensiveness, whose main problem (as Soyinka 
analyzed it) is that it implicitly accepts, and does not go beyond, the basic 
European versus non-European oppositions. Fanon's is a discourse of that 
anticipated triumph, liberation, that marks the second moment of decoloni­
zation. Yeats's early work, by contrast, sounds the nationalist note and stands 
at a threshold it cannot cross, although he sets a trajectory in common with 
that of other poets of decolonization, like Neruda and Darwish, which he 
could not complete, even though perhaps they could go further than he. One 
might at least give him credit for adumbrating the liberationist and utopian Yeau and Decolonization 235 
revolutionism in his poetry that was belied and even cancelled out by his 
later reactionary politics. 
Yeats has often been cited in recent years as someone whose poetry 
warned of nationalist excesses. He is quoted without attribution, for exam­
ple, in Gary Sick's book on the Carter administration's handling of the 
Iranian hostage crisis 1979-1981 (All Fall Down); 190 and The Nt'W York Times 
correspondent in Beirut in 1975-'77• the late James Markham, quoted the 
same passages from "The Second Coming" in an article on the onset of the 
Lebanese civil war in 1976. "Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold" is one 
phrase. The other is "The best lack all conviction, while the worst/ Are full 
of passionate intensity." Sick and Markham'both write as American liberals 
alarmed at the revolutionary tide sweeping through a Third World once 
contained by Western power. Their use of Yeats is minatory: rema,in or­
derly, or you're doomed to a frenzy you cannot control. As to how, in an 
inflamed colonial situation, the colonized are supposed to hold the center, 
neither Sick nor Markham tells us, but their presumption is that Yeats, in 
any event, would oppose the anarchy of civil war. It is as if both men had 
not thought to take the disorder back to the colonial intervention in the first 
place-which is what Chinua Achebe did in 1959 in his great novel Things 
Fall Apart. 101 
The point is that Yeats is at his most powerful precisely as he imagines 
and renders that very moment. It is helpful to remember that "the Anglo­
Irish conflict" with which Yeats's poetic oeuvre is saturated was a "model of 
twentieth-century wars of liberation." 10z His greatest decolonizing works 
concern the birth of violence, or the violent birth of change, as in "Leda and 
the Swan," instants when a blinding flash of simultaneity is presented to his 
colonial eyes--the girl's rape, and alongside that, the question "Did she put 
on his knowledge with his power/Before the indifferent beak could let her 
drop?" 103 Yeats situates himself at that juncture where the violence of change 
is unarguable but where the results of the violence beseech necessary, if not 
always sufficient, reason. His greatest theme, in the poetry that culminates 
in The To'Wt'T(192.8), is how to reconcile the inevitable violence of the colonial 
conflict with the everyday politics of an ongoing national struggle, and also 
how to square the power of the various parties in the conflict with the 
discourse of reason, persuasion, organization, and the requirements of po­
etry. Yeats's prophetic perception that at some point violence cannot be 
enough and that the strategies of politics and reason must come into play is, 
to my knowledge, the first important announcement in the context of · 
decolonization of the need to balance violent force with an exigent political 
and organizational process. Fanon's assertion that liberation cannot· be ac­
complished simply by seizing power (though "Even the wisest man grows RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
tense/With some son of violence") 104 comes almost half a century later. 
That neither Yeats nor Fanon offers a prescription for making a transition 
after decolonization to a period when a new political or~er achieves moral 
hegemony is symptomatic of the difficulty. that millions of people live with 
today. 
It is an amazing thing that the problem of Irish liberation not only has 
continued longer than other comparable struggles, but is so often not re-, 
garded as being an imperial or nationalist issue; instead it is comprehended 
as an aberration within the British dominions. Yet the facts conclusively 
reveal otherwise. Since Spenser's 1596 tract on Ireland, a whole tradition of 
British and European thought has considered the Irish to be a separate and 
inferior race, usually unregenerately barbarian, often delinquent and primi­
tive. ~rish nationalism for at least the last two hundred years is marked by 
internecine struggles involving the land question, the Church, the nature of 
parties and leaders. But dominating the movement is the attempt to regain 
control of the land where, in the words of the 1916 proclamation that founded 
the Irish Republic, "the right of the people of Ireland to the ownership of. 
Ireland, and to the unfettered control oflrish destinies, [is] to be sovereign 
and indefeasible." 105 
Yeats cannot be severed from this quest. Regardless of his astounding 
genius, he contributed, as Thomas Flanagan, puts it, "in Irish terms, and of 
course in a singularly powerful and compelling manner, that process of 
simultaneous abstraction and reification that, defiant of logic, is the bean 
of nationalism." 106 Arid to this work several generations of lesser writers also 
contributed, aniculating the expression of Irish identity as it attaches to the 
land, to its Celtic origins, to a growing body of nationalist experiences and 
leaders (Wolfe Tone, Connolly, Mitchel, Isaac Butt, O'Connell, the United 
Irishmen, the Home Rule movement, and so on), and to a specifically 
national literature. 107 Literary nationalism also retrospectively includes 
many forerunners: Thomas Moore, early literary historians like the Abbe 
McGeoghehan and Samuel Ferguson, James Clarence Mangan, the Orange­
Young Ireland movement, Standish O'Grady. In the poetic, dramatic, and 
scholarly work of today's Field Day Company (Seamus Heaney, Brian Friel, 
Seamus Deane, Tom Paulin) and of the literary historians Declan Kiberd 
and W.J. McCormack, these "revivals" of the Irish national experience are 
brilliantly reimagined and take the nationalist adventure to new forms of 
verbal expression. to& 
The essential Yeatsian themes sound through the earlier and later liter­
ary work: the problem of assuring the marriage of knowledge to power, of 
understanding violence; interestingly they are also sounded in Gramsci's Yeats and Decolonization 
roughly contemporary work, undenaken and elaborated in a di.tferent con­
text. In the Irish colonial setting, Yeats seems best able to pose and re-pose 
the question provocatively, using his poetry, Blackmur says, as a technique 
of trouble. 109 And he goes further in the great poems of summation and 
· vision like "Among School Children," "The Tower," "A Prayer for My 
Daughter," "Under Ben Bulben," and "The Circus Animals' Desertion." 
These ~re poems of genealogy and recapitulation, of course: telling and 
retelling the story of his life from early nationalist turbulence to the status 
of a senator walking through a classroom and thinking of how Leda 
figured in all their pasts, or a loving father thinking about his child, or a 
senior artist trying to achieve equanimity of vision, or finally, as a long­
time craftsman somehow sur-Viving the loss (desertion) of his powers, Yeats 
reconstructs his own life poetically as an epitome of the national life. 
These poems reverse the reductive and slanderous encapsulation oflrish 
actualities which, according to Joseph Leerssen's learned book Mere Irish and . 
Fior-Ghael, had been the fate of the Irish at the hands of English writers for 
eight centuries, displacing ahistorical rubrics like "potato-eaters," or "bog­
dwellers," or "shanty people." 110 Yeats's poetry joins his people to its history, 
the more imperatively in that as father, or as "sixty-year-old smiling public 
man," or as son and husband, the poet assumes that the narrative and the 
density of personal experience are equivalent to the experience of his 
people. The references in the closing strophes of" Among School Children" 
suggest that Yeats was reminding his audience that history and the nation 
are not separable, any more than a dancer is separate from the dance. 
l'he drama of Yeats's accomplishment in restoring a suppressed history 
and rejoining the nation to it is expressed well by Fanon's description of the 
situation Yeats had to overcome: "Colonialism is not satisfied merely with 
holding a people in its grip and emptying the native's brain of all form and 
content. By a kind of pervened logic, it turns to the past of the people, and 
distorts, disfigures and destroys it."111 Yeats rises from the level of personal 
and folk experience to that of national archetype without losing the im­
mediacy of the former or the stature of the latter. And his unerring choice 
of genealogical fables and figures speaks to another aspect of colonialism as 
Fanon described it: its capacity for separating the individual from his or her 
own instinctual life, breaking the generative lineaments of the national 
identity: 
On the unconscious plane, colonialism therefore did not seek to be 
considered by the native as a gently loving mother who protects her 
child from a hostile environment, but rather as a mother who unceas-RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
ingly restrains her fundamentally perverse offspring from managing to 
commit suicide and from giving free rein to its evil instincts. The 
colonial mother protects her child from itself, from its ego, and from its 
physiology, its biology, and its own unhappiness which is its very 
essence. 
In such a situation the claims ofthe native intellectual [and poet] are 
not a luxury but a necessity in any coherent program. The native 
intellectual who takes up arms to defend his nation's legitimacy, who 
is willing to strip himself naked to study the history of his body, is 
obliged to dissect the heart of his people. 112 
No wonder that Yeats instructed Irish poets to 
Scorn the sort now growing up 
All out of shape from toe to top, 
Their unremembering hearts and heads 
Base-born products of base beds. m 
That in the process Yeats ended up creating not individuals but types that 
"cannot quite overcome the abstractions from which they sprang," again 
according to Blackmur, 114 is true insofar as the decolonizing program and 
its background in the history of Ireland's subjugation are ignored, as 
Blackmur was wont to do; his interpretations are masterful yet ahistorical. 
When the colonial realities are taken into account, we get insight and 
experience, and not merely "the allegorical simulacrum churned with 
action." 1u 
Yeats's full system of cycles, pemes, and gyres seems important only as 
it symbolizes his efforts to lay hold of a distant and yet orderly reality as a 
refuge from the turbulence of his immediate experience. When in the 
Byzantium poems he asks to be gathered into the artifice of eternity, the 
need for respite from age and from what he would later call "the struggle 
of the fly in marmalade" is even more starkly at work. Otherwise it is difficult 
to read most of his poetry and not feel that Swift's devastating anger and 
genius were harnessed by Yeats to lift the burdens of Ireland's colonial 
a.fftictions. True, he stopped short of imagining full political liberation, but 
he gave us a major international achievement in cultural decolonization 
nonetheless. Xbe Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 239 
( IV ) 
The Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 
T he Irish experience and other colonial histories in other parts of the 
contemporary world testify to a new phenomenon: a spiral away .and 
extrapolation from Europe and the West. I am not saying that only native 
writers are part of this transformation, but the process begins most produc­
tively in peripheral, off-center work that gradually enters the West and then 
requires acknowledgement. 
As recently as thirty years ago, few European or American universities 
devoted curricular attention to African literature. Now a healthy interest is 
taken in the works of Bessie Head, Alex La Guma, W ole Soyinka, Nadine 
Gordimer, J. M. Coetzee as literature that speaks independently of an 
African experience. Similarly it is no longer possible to ignore the work of 
Anta Diop, Paulin Hountondjii, V. Y. Mudimbe, Ali Mazrui in even the most 
cursory survey of African history, politics, and philosophy. True, an ambi­
ance of polemic surrounds this work, but that is only because one cannot 
look at African writing except as embedded in its political circumstances, of 
which the history of imperialism and resistance to it is surely one of the most 
important. This is not to say that African culture is any less cultural than, 
say, French or British culture, but that it is harder to render invisible the 
politics of African culture. "Africa" is still a site of contention, as we can 
tell when we note that its scholars, like thos.e of the Middle East, are put 
into categories based on the old imperialist politic!!--pro-liberation, anti­
apartheid, and so on. A set of alliances, or intellectual formations, thus 
connects the English work of Basil Davidson with the politics of Amilcar 
Cabral, for example, to produce oppositional and independent scholarship. 
Nevertheless, many constituent parts ofthe West's major cultural forma­
tions; of which this "peripheral" work is one, have been historically hidden in 
and by imperialism's consolidating vision. One is reminded of Maupassant 
enjoying a daily lunch at the Eiffel Tower because it was the only place in Paris 
where he did not have to look at the imposing structure. Even now, since most 
accounts ofEuropean cultural history take little notice of the empire, and the 
great novelists especially are analyzed as if they were completely aloof from it, 
today's scholar and critic is accustomed to accept without noticing their 
imperial attitudes and references along with their authoritative centrality. RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
Yet it bears repeating that no matter how apparently complete the domi­
nance of an ideology or social system, there are always going to be pans of 
the social experience that it does not cover and control. From these parts 
very frequently comes opposition, both self-conscious and dialectical. This 
is not as complicated as it sounds. Opposition to a dominant structure arises 
out of a perceived, perhaps even militant awareness on the part of individu­
als and groups outside and inside it that, for example, certain of its policies 
are wrong. As the major studies of Gordon K. Lewis (Siavrry, Imperialism, and 
Freedom) and Robin Blackburn (The Overtht'O'W of Colonial Slavrry, 1771-rB48) 
show,116 an extraordinary amalgam of metropolitan individuals and move­
mentll--millenarians, revivalists, do-gooders, political radicals, cynical 
planters, and canny politicians--contributed to the decline and end of the 
slave trade by the 184os. And far from there being a single unopposed British 
colonial interest running directly from, say, the Hanoverians to Queen 
Victoria, historical research that might be called revisionist or oppositional 
has shown a variegated contest of interests. Scholars like Lewis, Blackburn, 
Basil Davidson, Terence Ranger, and E. P. Thompson among others pre­
mised their work on the paradigm given by the cultural and political resis­
tance within imperialism. Thus British historians of colonial India and Africa, 
for example, came to write oppositional histories of those territories in 
sympathetic alliance with local forces there, cultural as well as political, who 
were considered nationalist and anti-imperialist. As Thomas Hodgkin notes, 
having explained the rise and subsequent effects of imperialism, these intel­
lectuals tried to show "how this entire system of relationships, and the 
attitudes arising therefrom, can be abolished or transformed." 117 
A distinction between anti-colonialism and anti-imperialism needs 
quickly to be made. There was a lively European debate dating from at least 
the mid-eighteenth century on the merits and demerits of holding .colonies. 
Behind it were the earlier positions of Bartolome de las Casas, Francisco de 
Vitoria, Francisco Suarez, Camaens, and the Vatican, on the rights of native 
peoples and European abuses. Most French Enlightenment thinkers, among 
them Diderot and Montesquieu, subscribed to the Abbe Raynal's opposition 
•tO slavery and colonialism; similar views were expressed by Johnson, Cow­
per, and Burke, as well as by Voltaire, Rousseau, and Bernardin de St. Pierre. 
(A useful compilation of their thoughts is in Marcel Merle, L 'Anticolonialisme 
Europeen de Las Ctlfflf a Karl Marx.)1 18 During the nineteenth century, if we 
exclude rare exceptions like the Dutch writer Multatuli, debate over colo­
nies usually turned on their profitability, their management and mismanage­
ment, and on theoretical questions such as whether and how colonialism 
might be squared with laiue:r.-foire or tariff policies; an imperialist and Euro­
centric framework is implicitly accepted. Much of the discussion is both The Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 241 
obscure, and, as Harry Bracken and others have shown, ambiguous, even 
contradictory on the deeper questions concerning the ontological status, 
as it were, of European domination of non-Europeans. 119 Liberal anti­
colonialists, in other words, take the humane position that colonies and 
slaves ought not too severely to he ruled or held, hut-in the case of 
Enlightenment philosophers-do not dispute the fundamental superiority of 
Western man or, in some cases, of the white race. 
This view insinuated itself into the heart of the nineteenth-century disci­
plines and discourses dependent on knowledge observed and collected 
within the colonial setting. 120 But the period of decolonization is different. 
It is a matter of a changing cultural situation rather than completely distinct 
periods: just as nationalist or anti-imperial resistance in the colonies gJadu­
ally becomes more and more noticeable, so too do a wildly contradictory 
number of anti-imperialist forces. One of the earliest and perhaps the most 
famous of the systematic European critiques--]. A. Hobson's Imperialism: A 
Study (1902)-attacks imperialism for its heartless economics, its export of 
capital, its alliance with ruthless forces, and its facade of well-meaning 
"civilizing" pretexts. Yet the hook offers no critique of the notion of the 
"lower races," an idea Hobson finds acceptable. 121 Similar views were ad­
vanced by Ramsay MacDonald, certainly a critic of British imperialist prac­
tices hut not opposed to imperialism as such. 
No. one has studied the anti-imperialist movement in Britain and France 
better than A. P. Thornton {The Imperial Idea and Its Enemies), Bernard Porter 
{Cn'tics of Empire), and Raoul Girardet in his L 1dle co/oniale en France. Two 
main characteristics mark their summaries: certainly there were late­
nineteenth-century intellectuals (Wilfrid Scawen Blunt and William Mor­
ris) who were totally opposed to imperialism, hut they were far from influ­
ential; many of those who were, like Mary Kingsley and the Liverpool 
school, were self-described imperialists and jingoists yet remorselessly se­
vere about the abuses and cruelties of the system. In other words, there was 
no overall condemnation of imperialism until-and this is my point-after 
native uprisings were too far gone to be· ignored or defeated. 
(A footnote to this is worth registering: like Tocqueville on Algeria, 
European intellectuals were prone to attack the abuses of rival empires, 
while either mitigating or excusing the practices of their owri.122 This is the 
reason why I insist both on how modern empires replicate one another, 
despite their disclaimers about being different, and on the necessity of a 
rigorously anti-imperialist position. The United States was routinely turned 
to by many nationalist parties and leaders in the Third World because, 
through World War Two, it was openly anti-imperialist. As late as the 19sos 
!tnd early 196os, U.S. policy on Algeria shifted such as to alter the cordiality RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
of Franco-American relations quite considerably, all because the United 
States disapproved of French colonialism. Yet in general the United States 
after World War Two considered itself responsible for many parts of the 
Third World which the British and French had evacuated [Vietnam, of 
course, is the main instance], m and, because of an exceptional history based 
on the legitimacy of an anti-colonial revolution, largely exempt from the 
charge that in its own way it began to resemble Britain and France. Doc­
trines of cultural exceptionalism are altogether too abundant.) 
The second characteristic, especially brought out in Girardet, is that only 
after nationalistS first took the lead in the imperial territories, then expatriate 
intellectuals and activistS, did there develop a significant anti-colonial move­
ment in the metropolis. To Girardet writers like Aimc Cesaire and then 
F·anon represent a somewhat suspicious ''revolutionary messianism," but 
they did spur Sartre and other Europeans openly to oppose French colonial 
policy in Algeria and Indochina during the 19Jos.124 From those initiatives 
came others: humanist opposition to colonial practices like torture and 
deportation, a new awareness of the global end-of-empire era and, with it, 
redefinitions of national purpose, and, not least in the Cold War years, 
various defenses of the "Free World" that entailed winning over post­
colonial natives via cultural journals, trips, and seminars. A far from negligi­
ble part was played by the Soviet Union and by the United Nations, not 
always in good faith, and in the case of the former not for altruistic reasons; 
nearly every successful Third World liberation movement after World War 
Two was helped by the Soviet Union's counter-balancing inlluence against 
the United States, Britain, France, Portugal, and Holland. 
Most histories of European aesthetic modernism leave out the massive 
infusions of non-European cultures into the metropolitan heartland during 
the early years of this century, despite the patently important inlluence they 
had on modernist artists like Picasso, Stravinsky, and Matisse, and on the 
very fabric of a society that largely believed itself to be homogenously white 
and Western. In the interwar period students from India, Senegal, Vietnam, 
and the Caribbean B.ocked to London and Paris; 1Z5 journals, reviews, and 
political associations formed--one thinks of the pan-African congresses in 
England, magazines like Cri des neqes, parties like the Union des Travail­
leurs Negres established by expatriates, dissidents, exiles, and refugees, who 
paradoxically work better in the heart of the empire than in its far-flung 
domains, or of the invigoration provided African movements by the Har.lem 
Renaissance. 126 A common anti-imperialist experience was felt, with new 
associations between Europeans, Americans, and non-Europeans, and they 
transformed disciplines and gave voice to new ideas that unalterably 
changed that structure of attitude and reference which had endured for The Voyage In and the Emergence of 0ppoJ"ition 243 
generations within European culture. The cross-fertilization between Afri­
can nationalism as represented by George Padmore, Nkrumah, C.L.R.James 
on the one hand, and, on the other the emergence of a new literary style in 
the works ofCesaire, Senghor, poets of the Harlem Renaissance like Claude 
McKay and Langston Hughes, is a central part of the global history of 
modernism. · 
A huge and remarkable adjustment in perspective and understanding is 
required to take account of the contribution to modernism of decolonization, 
resistance culture, and the literature of opposition to imperialism. Although, 
as I said, the adjustment has still not fully taken place, there are good reasons 
for thinking that it has started. Many defenses of the West today are in fact 
defensive, as if to acknowledge that the old imperial ideas have been seri­
ously challenged by the works, traditions, and cultures to which poets, 
scholars, political leaders from Africa, Asia, and the Caribbean have contrib­
uted so greatly. Moreover, what Foucault has called subjugated knowledges 
have erupted across the field once controlled, so to speak, by the Judea­
Christian tradition; and those of us who live in the West have been deeply 
affected by the remarkable outpouring of first-rate literature and scholarship 
emanating from the post-colonial world, a locale no longer "one of the dark 
places of the earth" in Conrad's famous description, but once again the site 
of vigorous cultural effort To speak today of Gabriel Garda Marquez, 
Salman. Rushdie, Carlos Fuentes, Chinua Achebe, Wole Soyinka, Faiz 
Ahmad Faiz, and many others like them is to speak of a fairly novel 
emergent culture unthinkable without the earlier work of partisans like 
C.L.R.James, George Antonius, Edward Wilmot Blyden, W.E.B. DuBois, 
Jose Martf. 
I want to discuss one fairly discrete aspect of this powerful impinge­
ment-that is, the work of intellectuals from the colonial or peripheral 
regions who wrote in an '"imperial" language, who felt themselves organi­
cally related to the mass resistance to empire, and who set themselves the 
revisionist, critical task of dealing frontally with the metropolitan culture, 
using the techniques, discourses, and weapons of scholarship and criticism 
opce reserved exclusively for the European. Their work is, on its merits, 
only apparently dependent (and by no means parasitic) on mainstream 
Western discourses; the result of its originality and creativity has been the 
transformation of the very terrain of the disciplines. 
A general, quasi-theoretical account of the phenomenon I shall be dis­
cussing occurs in Raymond Williams's Culture (1981). In the chapter on what 
he calls "Formations," Williams begins by discussing guilds, professions, 
clubs, and movements, and then proceeds to the more complex issues of 
schools, factions, dissidents, and rebels. All these, he says, "relate to develop-RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
ments within a single national social order." In the twentieth century, 
however, new international or para-national formations occur, and they 
have tended to be avant-garde in the metropolitan center. To some extent 
these para-formations-Paris IIJ?o-193o, New York 194o-197o--are the result 
of newly effective market forces that internationalize culture--for instance, 
"W est~rn music," twentieth-century art, European literature. But more in­
terestingly "contributors to avant-garde movements were immigrants to 
such a metropolis, not only from outlying national regions bm from other 
and smaller national cultures, now seen as culturally provincial in relation 
to the metropolis." Williams's example is Apollinaire, although he writes of 
"the sociology of metropolitan encounters and associations between immi­
grants'' and mainstream groups, which "create especially favorable support­
ive conditions for dissident groups." 127 
Williams concludes by saying that it is still not certain whether such 
encounters produce effects of "sharp and even violent breaks with tradi­
tional practices (a dissidence or revolt rather than a literal avant-garde)" or 
whether they are absorbed into and become a part of the "dominant culture 
of a succeeding metropolitan and paranational period." Yet if we historicize ' 
and politicize Williams's argument at the outset and then put it into the 
historical setting of imperialism and anti-imperialism, a number of factors 
become clear. First, anti-imperialist intellectual and scholarly work done by 
writers from, the peripheries who have immigrated to or are visiting the 
metropolis is usually an extension into the metropolis of large-scale mass 
movements. One vivid expression of this occurred during the Algerian war, 
when the FLN called France the Seventh Wilaya, the other six constituting 
Algeria proper, m thus moving the contest over decolonization from the 
peripheries to the center. Second, these incursions concern the same areas 
of experience, culture, history, and tradition hitherto commanded unilater­
ally by the metropolitan center. When Fanon wrote his books, he intended 
to talk abom the experience of colonialism as seen by a Frenchman, from 
within a French space hitherto inviolable and now invaded and re-examined 
critically by a dissenting native. There is thus an overlap and interdepen­
dence that cannot theoretically be described as only the reactive assertion 
of a separate colonial or native identity. Last, these voyagei in represent, I 
believe, a still unresolved contradiction or discrepancy within metropolitan 
culture, which through co-optation, dilution, and avoidance partly acknowl­
edges and partly refuses the effort. 
The voyage in, then, constitutes an especially interesting variety of hybrid 
cultural work. And that it exists at all is a sign of adversarial internationaliza­
tion in an age of continued imperial structures. No longer does the logos 
dwell exclusively, as it were, in London and Paris. No longer does history The Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 245 
run unilaterally, as Hegel believed, from east to west, or from south to north, 
becoming more sophisticated and developed, less primitive and backward as 
it goes. Instead, the weapons of criticism have become part of the historical 
legacy ·of empire, in which the separations and exclusions of "divide and 
rule" are erased and surprising new configurations spring up. 
Each of the four texts I want to discuss belongs specifically to a particular 
historical moment: the first two are C.L.R. James's The Black Jacobins, pub­
lished in 1938, and, appearing at almost the same time, George Antonius's 
The Arab Awakening. The first is about a late-eighteenth-century Black Carib­
bean insurrection, the other about a recent Arab one; both deal with events 
in the past in whose pattern, protagonist, and antagonist the writer is con­
cerned to detect a native or colonial reality that was ignored or betrayed by 
Europe. Both writers are brilliant stylists, remarkable men (and in the case 
of James a sportsman), whose early formation in British colonial schools 
brought forth a wonderful appreciation of English culture as well as serious 
disagreements with it. Both books now seem remarkably prescient, James 
forecasting an unbroken history of agonized and still profoundly unsettled 
Caribbean life, Antonius just as precisely forecasting today's front-page 
stories and shocking televised scenes from the Middle East, as the situation 
in .Palestine-Israel remains fraught, having already resolved itself adversely 
from the Arab point of view with the establishment of Israel in 1948, an 
eventuality predicted with dire forebodings by Antonius ten years before the 
fact. 
Whereas the James and Antonius books were intended as serious works 
of s,cholarship and advocacy addressed from within a national movement for 
independence to a general audience, my other two works, Ranajit Guha's 
A Rule of Property for Bengal ( 1963) and S. H. Alatas's The Myth of the Lazy Native 
(1977), are post-colonial and specialist, addressing a smaller audience about 
more specific issues. Both these books, the former by a Bengali political 
economiSt, the latter by a Malaysian Muslim historian and social theorist, 
show their authors' assiduous archival research and scrupulously up-to-date . 
documentation, argument, and generalization. 
Guha's book is, in a manner that later post-structuralist writers (including 
Guha himself) recognize, an archeological and deconstructive study of how 
the 1826 Act of Permanent Settlemem for Bengal-according to which the 
British regulated rents and revenues in Bengal with unvatying precision­
derived from a complex background ofPhysiocratic and Ideological thought 
in Europe that had been pressed into service in Bengal in the late eighteenth 
century by Philip Francis. Alatas's book, as startlingly original in its own way 
as Guha's, also details how European colonialism created an object, in this 
case the lazy native, who performed a crucial function in the calculations RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
and advocacies of what Alatas calls colonial capitalism. This native, sub­
jected to astringent rules and an exacting discipline, was meant, in the words 
ofSinbaldo de Mas, a Spanish official who in 1843 was entrusted with keeping 
the Philippines as a Spanish colony, to be sustained "in an intellectual and 
moral state that despite their numerical superiority they may weigh less 
politically than a bar of gold"; 129 this native was talked about, analyzed, 
abused, and worked, fed with bad food and with opium, separated from his 
or her natural environment, covered with a discourse whose purpose was to 
keep him industrious and subordinate. Thus, says Alatas, "Gambling, opium, 
inhuman labour conditions, one-sided legislation, acquisition of tenancy 
rights belonging to the people, forced labour, were all in one way or another 
woven into the fabric ofcolonial ideology and given an aura of respectabil­
ity. Those outside it were derided."uo 
The contrast between James and Antonius on the one hand and Guha and 
Alatas on the other is not only that the earlier writers were more immedi­
ately involved in contemporary politics, whereas the later two care a great 
deal about scholarly disputes in post-colonial India and Malaysia, but that 
post -colonial history. itself has changed the terms, indeed the very nature of' 
the argument. For James and Antonius the world of discourse inhabited by 
natives in the Caribbean and the Arab Orient during the 1930s was honorably 
dep·endent upon the West. Toussaint L'Ouverrure, says James, could not 
have argued the way he did were it not ,for the Abbe Raynal, other Ency­
clopedists, and the great Revolution itself. 
in the hour of danger Toussaint, uninstructed as he was, could find the 
language and accent of Diderot, Rousseau and Raynal, of Mirabeau, 
Robespierre and Danton. And in one respect he excelled them all. For 
even these masters of the spoken and written word, owing to the class 
complications of their society, too often had to pause, to hesitate, to 
qualify. Toussaint could defend the freedom of the blacks without 
reservation, and this gave to his declaration a strength and a single­
mindedness rare in the great documents of the time. The French 
bourgeoisie could not understand it. Rivers of blood were to flow before 
they understood that elevated as was his tone Toussaint had written 
neither bombast nor rhetoric but the simple and sober truth.131 
In this wonderful description of a man completely internalizing. the literal 
truth of the universalist sentiments propounded by the European Enlighten­
ment, James shows Toussaint's sincerity and also his latent flaw, his willing­
ness to trust European declarations, to see them as literal intentions rather 
than class and history-determined remarks of interests and groups. The Voyage In and the Emergence ofOpfXJsition 247 
Antonius developed much the same theme; his chronicle of the Arab 
awakening, nurtured by Britain early in our own century, focuses on how the 
Arabs, after liberating themselves from the Ottomans in 1917 and 1918, took 
British promises for Arab independence as the literal truth. Antonius's ac­
count of Sherif Hussein's correspondence with Sir Henry McMahon, in 
which the British official promised his people independence and sover­
eignty, corresponds to James's description of how Toussaint grasped and 
acted upon the Declarations of the Rights of Man. Yet for Antonius, who 
writes as a partisan of both the Arabs and the British-a classic case of 
interdependence if there ever was one--it is deliberate subterfuge, ascribed 
neither to classes nor to history but to dishonor, which for him has the force 
of catastrophe. 
There is little doubt that the verdict of history will substantially en­
dorse the Arab view. Whatever else may be said of the San Remo 
decisions [of spring 1920, in which "the whole of the Arab Rectangle 
lying between the Mediterranean and the Persian frontier was to· be 
placed under mandatory rule"] they did violate the general principles 
proclaimed and the specific promises made by the Allies, and more 
,particularly by Great Britain. The purport of the pledges given in 
secret is now known: what with that and the assurances made publicly, 
the student has all the relevant material for a judgement. It was on the 
strength of those promises that the Arabs had come into the War and 
made their contribution and their sacrifices; and that fact alone sufficed 
,to turn the corresponding obligation into a debt of honour. What the 
.San Remo conference did was, in effect, to ignore the debt and come 
to decisions which, on all the essential points, ran counter to the wishes 
of the peoples concemed.•3 2 
It would be wrong to downplay the differences between James and An­
tonius, separated as they are not only by ideology and race, but by tempera­
ment and education. Still, the same sadness, disappointment, and unrequited 
hope linger unmistakably in their prose, and both men belonged to, and were 
shaped by, the politics of decolonization. James belonged to .the lower 
middle class in Trinidad; he was an autodidact, athlete, and ever-as I was 
able to see for myself when I visited him, then aged eighty-six, in Brixton 
in June 1987-the precocious schoolboy, with the revolutionary's interest in 
history, politics, and theory, and the intellectual's attentiveness to ideas, 
contradictions, and the sheer sporty adventurousness of good literature, 
music, and conversation. Antonius, as Albert Hourani has memorably de­
scribed him, 133 belonged to an older, more worldly class of Levan tine Syri-RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
ans resident for a time in Egypt (where he attended Victoria College, a 
school I myself attended); he was graduated from Cambridge University. 
When he wrote The Arab Awakenin11 Antonius was in his forties (he died in 
1942., aged about fifty); James was a full decade younger. Whereas Antonius 
had had a rich career as a confidant of high British officers, as adviser to 
major Arab leaders and elites from Hussein and Faysal to Faris Nimr and 
Haj Amin al-Husayni, as heir to decades of Arab nationalist thought and 
activity, and was a worldly man addressing other worldly men in positions 
of power, James, newly arrived in England, worked as a cricket correspon­
dent; he was a Black, a Marxist, a great public speaker and organizer; above 
all he was a revolutionary steeped in African, Caribbean, and Black national­
ism. The Black Jacobin.r was first presented not as a book but as an acting 
vehicle in London for Paul Robeson; during the performances of the play, 
Robeson and James alternated the parts of Toussaint and Dessalines.13 4 
Despite the differences between the indigent and itinerant West Indian 
Black Marxist historian and the more conservative, highly educated, and 
brilliantly well-connected Arab, both addressed their work to a world they 
considered their own, even if that very European world of power and 
colonial domination excluded, to some degree subjugated, and deeply disap­
pointed them. They addressed that world from within it, and on cultural 
grounds they disputed and challenged its authority by presenting alternative 
versions of it, dramatically, argumentatively, and intimately. There Is no 
sense in their work of their standing outside the Western cultural tradition, 
however much they articulate the adversarial experience of colonial and/or 
non-Western peoples. Well after negn'tude, Black nationalism, and the nativ­
ism of the 1960S and 1970s,James stUbbornly supported the Western heritage 
at the same time that he belonged to the insurrectionary anti-imperialist 
moment which he shared with Fanon, Cabral, and Rodney. In an interview 
he said: 
How am I to return to non-European roots? If it means that Caribbean 
writers today should be aware that there are emphases in their writing 
that we owe to non-European, non-Shakespearean roots, and the past 
in music that is not Beethoven, that I agree. But I don't like them posed 
there in the way they have been posed either-or. I don't think so. I think 
both of them. And fundamentally we are a people whose literacy and 
aesthetic past is rooted in Western European civilisation.m 
And if in his masterful account of the rise of Arab nationalism Antonius 
stresses the capital importance of the rediscovery of the Arabic language and 
the classical Islamic heritage (most often through the work of Christian The Voy{!ge in and the Emergence of Opposition 249 
thinkers like himself, an emphasis that subsequent historians have criticized 
as exaggerated), he also insists that the Arabic tradition is in no essential way 
in conflict with the Western one. There is instead parturition and filiation 
between them, as, for example, he explains in the following important 
passage: 
The educational activities of the American missionaries in that early 
period (the 18sos and z86os] had, among many virtues, one outstanding 
merit; they gave the pride of place to Arabic, and, once they had 
committed themselves to teaching in it, put their shoulders with vigour 
to the task of providing an adequate literature. In that, they were the 
pioneers; and because of that, the intellectual effervescence which 
marked the first stirrings of the Arab revival owes most to · their 
labours.• 36 
No such· harmonious coincidence between the West and its overseas 
colonies is observed in the work of Guha and Alatas. The colonial wars and 
the protracted political and military conllicts thereafter have intervened. 
And if direct political control has disappeared, economic, political, and 
sometimes military domination, accompanied by cultural hegemony-the 
force of ruling and, as Gramsci calls them, directive ( tlirigente) ideas­
emanating from the West and exerting power over the peripheral world, has 
sustained it. One of the sharpest attacks in Alatas's The Myth of the Lazy Native 
is against those Malaysians who continue to reproduce in their own thinking 
the, colonial ideology that created and sustained the "lazy native" idea. In 
passages that recall Fanon's strictures against the nationalist bourgeoisie, 
Alatas shows how residues of colonial capitalism remain in the thought of 
the newly autonomous Malays, confining them-those, that is, who have not 
become self-conscious in methodology and aware of the class affiliations that 
affect thought-to the categories of "colonial capitalist thou~ht" Thus, he 
continues, 
The false consciousness distorts the reality. The Malay ruling party 
inherited the rule from the British without a struggle for independence 
such as that which took place in Indonesia, India and the Philippines. 
As such there was also no ideological struggle. There was no intellec­
tual break with British ideological thinking at the deeper level of 
thought. The leadership of this party were recruited from the top 
hierarchy of the civil service trained by the British, and middle class 
Malay school teachers and civil servants. The few professionals as­
sociated with it did not set the pattem.m 2.50 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
Guha is no less concerned with the problematic of continuity and discon­
tinuity, but for him the issue has autobiographical resonances, given his own 
profoundly self-conscious methodological preoccupations. How is one to 
study the Indian past as radically affected by British power not in the 
abstract but concretely when one is a modern Indian whose origin, upbring­
ing, and family reality historically depended on that power? How can one 
see that relationship after Indian independence when one had been of, rather 
than outside, it? Guha's predicament is resolved in an intellectual strategy 
that dramatizes the strict otherness of British rule, which gave rise not only 
to the Act of Permanent Settlement but also to his own class·: 
In his early youth the author, like many others of his generation in 
Bengal, grew up in the shadow of the Permanent Settlement: his liveli­
hood, like that of his family, was derived from remote estates they had 
never visited; his education was orientated by the needs of a colonial 
bureaucracy recruiting its cadre from among the scions of Lord Corn­
wallis's beneficiaries; his world of culture was strictly circumscribed by 
the values of a middle class living off the fat of the land and divorced 
from the indigenous culture of its peasant masses. He had therefore 
learnt to regard the Permanent Settlement as a chaner of social and. 
economic stagnation. Subsequently, as a post-graduate student of Cal­
cutta University he read about the anti-feudal ideas of Philip Francis 
and was at once faced with a question which the text-books and the 
academics could not answer for him. How was it that the quasi-feudal 
land settlement of '793 had originated from the ideas of a man who was 
a great admirer of the French Revolution? One could not know from 
the history books that such a contradiction existed and had to be 
explained. The manuals were satisfied that the good work England had 
done in India represented a series of successful experiments which had 
little to do with the ideas and prejudices inherited by the rulers from 
their European background. This view of British policy as a "rootless 
blossom" is not confirmed by the history of the land law that had the 
longest life under the raj. The author hopes that he has been able to 
locate the origins of the Permanent Settlement in that confluence of 
ideas where the two mainstreams of English and French thought 
merged in the second half of the eighteenth century. 138 
An act of separation repeats the basic gesture of decolonization. By under­
standing that the ideology that produced Permanent Settlement in India 
derived historically from French and British sources, and by seeing that his The Voyage In and the Eme:gence of Opposition 2. JI 
own class heritage stemmed not from the land but from the structure of 
colonial power, Guha can thereafter detach himself intellectually. As it is for 
Alatas, history for Guha is critique, not the dutiful replication of colonialist 
objects, ideologies, and argum~nts. In subsequent work, both men concen­
trate on trying to rescue the suppressed native voice from colonial history, 
and to derive new historiographical insights not only into the past but into 
the very weaknesses in native society that made it for so long vulnerable to 
schemes like the Act of Permanent Settlement. 
In the introductory essay to Subaltern Studies, a series of collective volumes 
by like-minded colleagues launched under his aegis in 1982, Guha remarks 
that the "unhistorical historiography" of colonial India left out "the politics 
of the people"-in favor of the nationalist elites created by the British. Hence 
"the historic failure of the nation to come into its own," which makes "the 
study of this failure rwhat] constitutes the central problematic of the histori­
ography of colonial India."H 9 
Metropolitan culture, in short, can now be seen to have suppressed the 
authentic elements in colonized society. It is not simply that Alatas and 
Guha are academic specialists, but that, after several decades of indepen­
dence, the relationship between cultures is perceived as radically antitheti­
cal. One sign of this new post-war perception is the gradual disappearance 
of narrative. The subjects of The Arab Awakening and The Black 7acobins 
are mass movements led by 'extraordinary leaders. There are gripping, 
even noble stories here, of the rise of popular resistance movements--the 
slave revolt in Santo Domingo, the Arab revolt~and narratives, inJean­
Frap~ois Lyotard's terms, of enlightenment and emancipation. No such 
stories animate the pages of Alatas and Guha. 
One strikingly similar aspect of both the earlier books is that they are 
meant to enlarge the awareness of Western readers, for whom the narrated 
events were previously recounted by metropolitan witnesses. James's task is 
to produce a narrative of the French Revolution that incorporates events in 
France and overseas, and so for him Toussaint and Napoleon are the two 
great figures produced by the Revolution. The Arab Awakening is, in all sorts 
of fascinating ways, designed to restrict and counteract the very famous 
account of the Arab Revolt written and much vaunted by T. E. Lawrence 
in The Seven Pillars of Wisdom. Here at last, Antonius seems to be saying, the 
Arabs, their leaders and warriors and thinkers, can tell their own story. It is 
an aspect of their generous historical' vision that both James and Antonius 
offer an alternative narrative that can be read as part of a story already 
well-known to European audiences, but not until now well-known from a 
native point of view. And of course both men write from the standpoint of 2J2 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
an ongoing mass political struggle-"Negro revolution" in James's case, 
Arab nationalism in Antonius's. The enemy is still the same, Europe and the 
West. 
One problem with Antonius's book-is that because he is principally 
focussed on the political events in which he himself was so involved, he 
either scants or does not adequately assess the vast cultural revival in the 
Arab and Islamic world that preceded his own period. Later historians-A. 
L Tibawi, Albert Hourani, Hisham Sharabi, Bassam Tibi, Mohammad Abed 
al-J abry--Qffer a more precise and wider account of this revival, and of its 
awareness (already present inJabarti) of Western imperial impingement on 
Islam. 140 Writers like the Egyptian Tahtawi or the Tunisian Khayr al-Din, 
or the crucial late-nineteenth-century religious pamphleteers and reformers 
who include Jamal ai-Din ai-Afghani and Muhammad Abduh, emphasize 
the importance of developing a revitalized independent culture to resist the 
West, to match it technologically, to be able to develop a coherently indige­
nous Arab-Islamic identity. Such an important study as A. A. Duri's The 
Histurical Formation of the Arab Nation (1984) 141 carries that story into the 
classical Arab nationalist narrative of an integral nation, pursuing its own 
development in spite of such obstacles as imperialism, internal stagnation, 
economic underdevelopment, political despotism. 
In all these works, including Antonius's, the narrative progresses from 
dependence and inferiority to nationalist revival, independent state forma­
tion, and cultural autonomy in anxious partnership with the West. This is 
very far from a triumphalist story. Lodged at its heart, so to speak, is a 
complex of hope, betrayal, and bitter disappointment; the discourse of Arab 
nationalism today carries this complex along with it. The result is an unful­
filled and incomplete culture, expressing itself in a fragmented language of 
torment, angry insistence, often uncritical condemnation of outside (usually 
Western) enemies. Post-colonial Arab states thus have two choices: many, 
like Syria and Iraq, retain the pan-Arab infl.ection, using it to justify a 
one-party national security state that has swallowed up civil society almost 
completely; others, like Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Morocco, while retaining as­
pects of the first alternative, have devolved into a regional or local national­
ism whose political culture has not, I believe, developed beyond dependence 
on the metropolitan West. Both alternatives, implicit in The Arab A'UJIIkening, 
are at odds with Antonius's own preference for dignified and integral 
autonomy. 
In James's case, The Black Jacobins bridges an important cultural and 
political gap between Caribbean, specifically Black, history on the one hand, 
and European history on the other. Yet it too is fed by more currents and 
flows in a wider stream than even its rich narrative may suggest. At about The Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 253 
the same time James composed A History of Negro Revolt (1938), whose purpose 
was "to give historical depth to the process of resistance itself," in Walter 
Rodney's brilliant description of the work.142 Rodney notes that James 
acknowledged the long-standing (if usually unsuccessful) resistance to 
colonialism in Africa and the Caribbean that went unrecognized by colonial 
historians. Again like that of Antonius, his work was an adjunct to his 
engagement with and commitment to African and .West Indian political 
struggle, a commitment that took him to the United States, to Africa (where 
his life-long friendship with George Padmore and a mature association with 
Nkrumah were crucial to the formation of politics in Ghana, as is clear from 
his highly critical study Nlerumah and the Ghana Revolution), then to the West 
Indies again, and finally to England. 
Although James was an anti-Stalinist dialectician, like Antonius's, his 
critical attitude to the West as imperial center never kept him from under­
standing its cultural achievements, or from criticizing failings of the Black 
partisans (like Nkrumah) he supported. He lived longer than Antonius of 
course, but, as his opinions expanded and changed, as he added more areas 
of experience to his liberationist concerns, as he entered and exited from 
polemics and controversies, he kept a steady focus on (the phrase keeps 
turning up) the story. He saw the central pattern of politics and history in 
linear terms--"from Du Bois to Fanon," "from Toussaint to Castro"-and 
his basic metaphor is that of a voyage taken by ideas and people; those who 
were slaves and subservient classes could first become the immigrants and 
then the principal intellectuals of a diverse new society. 
I~ the work of Guha and Alatas, that narrative sense of the human 
adventure is replaced with irony. Both men bring to light the unattractive 
strategies that went along with the pretensions of imperialism, its now 
completely discredited ideology of ennoblement and pedagogic improve­
ment. Consider first Guha's minute reconstruction of the ways in which 
British East India Company officials married empiricism and anti-feudalism 
to French Physiocratic philosophy (whose basis was the ideology of land 
revenue) in order to achieve a permanence of British dominion, to use 
the phrase employed by Guha's protagonist Philip Francis. 143 Guha's mas­
terful account of Francis--a "young Alcibiades" who was a friend of 
Burke, contemporary of Warren Hastings, anti-monarchist, abolitionist, 
consummate political animal-and his idea of permanent settlement is 
told as a montage, with various cuts and splices, not as a heroic story. 
Guha shows how Francis's ideas about land and their gradual acceptance 
well after his years of service occur along with the refurbishing of the 
image of Hastings, and help to enhance, enrich, and buttress the idea of 
Empire, which, to quote Guha, 1)4 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
was already fast outstripping in importance the individual record of its 
architects and as an abstraction assuming the independence of a firm's 
goodwill with respect to the personality of its founder. 144 
Guha's theme is therefore the way abstraction requires and appropriates 
not only people but geography. The central notion is that as imperialists the 
British felt their task in India was to solve "the problem of sovereignty in 
Bengal" 145 in favor, naturally enough, of the British crown. And Francis's 
real achievement in decreeing the scheme'whereby all the land rents in 
Bengal were to be permanently settled according to mathematical formulae 
was that he succeeded in "forming or restoring the constitution of an 
Empire." 146 
Guha's work is intended to demonstrate one way to dismantle imperial 
historiography-undergirded by the British charting of Indian territory­
not in India so much as in Europe, the original site of its greatest security, 
longevity, and authority. The irony is that a native does the job, mastering 
not only sources and methods, but the overpowering abstractions whose 
traces in the minds of imperialists themselves were scarcely discernible 
when they originated. 
The same dramatic achievement occurs in Alatas's book. Whereas Guha's 
characters are literally ideologists, concerned with asserting authority over 
India in philosophically coherent ways, no such program is claimed for the 
Portuguese; Spanish, and British colonialists analyzed by Alatas.' They are 
in the Southeast Pacific to get treasure (rubber and metals) and cheap labor, 
in the pursuit of economic profit. Requiring service from the natives, they 
devise various schemes for lucrative colonial economies, destroying local 
middle~ level traders in the process, subjugating and virtually enslaving the 
natives, setting off internecine ethnic wars among Chinese, Javanese, and 
Malaysian communities the better to rule and to keep the natives divided 
as well as weak. Out of this welter emerges the mythical figure of the lazy 
native, from whose existence as an essential and unchanging constant in 
·Eastern society, a number of basic truths supposedly flow. Alatas patiently 
documents how these descriptions-all of them based on the "false con~ 
sciousness" of colonialists unwilling to accept that the natives' refusal to 
work was one of the earliest forms of resistance to the European incursion­
steadily acquire consistency, authority, and the irrefutable immediacy of 
objective reality. ObservC?rs such as Raflles then construct a rationale for · 
further subjugating and punishing the natives, since the decline in native 
character had already occurred, as colonialist administrators saw it, and was 
irreversible. 
Alatas supplies us with an alternative argument about the meaning of the The Voyage In and the Emergence of Oppo.;ition lSS 
lazy native, or rather, he supplies us with an argument for why the Euro­
peans succeeded in holding on to the myth for as long as they did. Indeed, 
he also demonstrates how the myth lives on, how, in Eric Williams's words 
quoted earlier, "an outworn interest, whose bankruptcy smells to heaven in 
historical perspective, can exercise an obstructionist and disruptive effect 
which can only be explained by the powerful services it had previously 
rendered and the entr~nchment previously gained." 147 The myth of the lazy 
native is synonymous with.domination, and domination is at bottom power. 
· Many scholars have become so accustomed . to regard power only as a 
discursive effect that Alatas's description of how the colonialists systemati­
cally destroyed the commercial coastal states on Sumatra and along the 
Malay coast, how territorial conquest led to the elimination of native classes 
like fishermen and weapons craftsmen, and how, above all, foreign overlords 
did things that no indigenous class ever would, is likely to shock us with its 
plainness: 
Power falling into Dutch hands was different from power falling into 
the hands of an indigenous successor. An indigenous power was gener­
ally more liberal in trade. It did not destroy its own trading class 
throughout the whole area, and continued to use the products. of its 
own industry. It built its own boats, and last but not least was incapable 
of imposing a monopoly throughout the major part of Indonesia. It 
promoted the abilities of its own people even though a tyrant was on 
the throne. 148 
\ 
Control of the son described here by Alatas and by Guha in his book is 
almost total and in devastating, continuous conflict with the colonized 
society. To tell the narrative of how a continuity is established between 
Europe and its peripheral colonies is therefore impossible, whether from the 
European or the colonial side; what seems most appropriate for the decolo­
nizing scholar is instead a hermeneutics of suspicion. Nevertheless, though 
the grand, nourishingly optimistic narratives of emancipatory nationalism 
no longer serve· to confirm a community of culture as they did for James and 
Antonius in the 193os, a new community of method-more difficult and 
astringent in its demands--arises instead. Guha's work has stimulated an 
important cooperative enterprise, Subaltern Studies, which in turn has led 
Guha and his colleagues into remarkable further researches on the problems 
of power, historiography, and people's history. Alatas's work has had two 
aims: to establish a foundation for a post-colonial methodology of South 
Asian history and society, and to further the demystifying and deconstruc­
tive work suggested in The Myth of the Lazy Native. RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
I do not mean to suggest either that the enthusiasm and passionately 
narrated works of the two pre-war intellectuals have been rejected and 
found wanting by later generations, or that tbe more technical and demand­
ing work by Alatas and Guha shows a more narrowly professional and, alas, 
less culturally generous view of the metropolitan Western audience. Rather, 
it seems to me that James and Antonius speak for movements already 
launched toward self-determination, albeit of a partial and ultimately very 
unsatisfactory sort, whereas Guha and Alatas, in their discussion of issues 
raised by the post-colonial predicament, take earlier successes (such as 
national independence) for granted while also underlining the imperfections 
of the decolonizations, the freedoms and self-identity gained hitherto. Also, 
Guha and Alatas address themselves equally to Western scholars and to 
compatriots, native scholars still held in thrall by colonialist conceptions of 
their own past 
The question of constituency raises the more general question of audi­
ences; as the many general readers of The Black JacrJbin.r or The Arah Awaken­
ing can quickly testify, the audience has shrunk for the later, more 
disciplinary and rarefied books. James and Antonius assume that what they 
have to say is of major political and aesthetic import. James draws Toussaint 
as an appealingly admirable man, non-vindictive, immensely intelligent, 
subtle, and responsive to the sufferings of his fellow Haitians. "Great men 
make history," says James, "but only such history as it is possible for them 
to make." 149 Toussaint rarely took his people into his confidence and he 
misjudged his antagonists. James makes no such mistake, sustains no illu­
sions. In The Black Jacobinr he clinically reconstructs the imperialist context 
of self-interest and moral scruple out of which British Abolitionism and the 
well-intentioned WilberfOrce arose; but as France and the Haitian Blacks 
were locked in bloody war, the British government manipulatea philan­
thropic feeling to advance British Caribbean power at the expense of France 
and her antagonists. James is excoriating about imperialism's never giving 
anything away. Yet he retains his faith in the persuasive powers of a narra­
tive whose main ingredients are the struggle for freedom common to France 
and to Haiti, and the wish to know and act; this underpins his writing as a 
Black historian for a contesting Black as well as a metropolitan white 
audience. 
Is this wyage in retributive, the repressed colonial object coming to haunt 
and dog the footsteps of the modern European, for whom the misshapen 
lega~ of Toussaint in the Duvaliers and Trujillos of this world confirms the 
idea of the savage non-European? James does not fall into the trap of being 
mainly reactive, preferring instead, in his 1962. preface, to show how Tous­
saint's revolutionary ideas have re-emerged in successful liberation struggles The Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 2.57 
and, with equal force, in the birth of newly self-conscious and confident 
national cultures, aware of the colonial past yet pushing toward "the ulti­
mate stage of a Caribbean quest for national identity." 150 Not for nothing has 
James been considered by so many writers--George Lamming, V. S. Nai­
paul, Eric Williams, Wilson Harris-the grand patriarch of contemporary 
West Indian culture. 
Similarly for Antonius, the Allies' betrayal ofthe Arabs does not diminish 
the grand retrospective sweep of his narrative, in which the Arabs are moved 
·by ideas of freedom shared with Europeans. Just as The Black Jacobin.r 
grounded the study of modem "Negro Revolt" Oames's phrase), so also did 
The Arab Awkening inaugurate the academic investigation of Arab national­
ism, which has gradually become a discipline not only in the Arab world but 
also in the West. Here too the affiliation with an ongoing politics is espe­
cially moving. Taking his case and expressing the unfulfilled self-determina­
tion of the Arabs to the same jury of Western politicians and thinkers who 
had thwarted a movement of history, Antonius is very much like James 
speaking both to his own people and to a resistant white audience for whoin 
the emancipation of non-whites had become a marginal issue. The appeal 
made is not to fairness or compassion, but to the often startling and super­
vening realities of history itsel£ How remarkable then to read Antonius's 
comments contained in a lecture at Princeton in 1935, while he was working 
on The Arab Awkening,· 
It often happens in the history of nations that a conflict of opposing 
forces which seems destined inevitably to end in the triumph of the 
stronger party is given an unspecified twist by the emergence of new 
forces which owe their emergence to that very triumph. m 
Uncannily, it seems to me, Antonius was seeing from the depths ofpresent 
disappointment through to the explosion of that very mass insurrection he 
seems in his b(lok implicidy to be arguing for. (The Palestinian intifada, one 
of the great anti-colonial uprisings of our times, continues the struggle over 
historical Palestine, one of the principal themes of The Arab Awakening.) 
And that observation returns us brusquely to the general subject of schoi­
arship and politics. Each of the scholars I have discussed is firmly rooted in 
a local situation, with its histories, traditions, and affiliations inflecting both 
the choice of topic and its treatment. Antonius's book, for example, solicits 
our attention today as a history of early-twentieth-century Arab nationalism 
and as the poignant document of a class of notables superseded after the 193os 
and '4os by more radical, popular, and nativist writers in Arabic; no longer 
could, or need, Western policymakers be addressed at all, much less ad-RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
dressed from within a common universe of discourse. Guha emerges in the 
196os as an exile, profoundly at odds with Indian politics, controlled as they 
were by those whom Tariq Ali has called "the Nehrus and the Gandhis."uz 
Politics-----and the frankly political impulse behind their work-naturally 
affects the scholarship and research that all four men present An explicit 
political or human urgency in the tone and the import of their books 
contrasts noticeably with what in the modem West has come to represent 
the norm for scholarship. (How that norm, with its supposed detachment, its 
protestations of objectivity and impartiality, its code of politesse and ritual 
calmness, came about is a problem for the sociology of taste and know ledge.) 
Each of these four Third World intellectuals writes out of and within a 
political situation whose pressures are constant, not momentary annoyances 
or minor empirical concerns to be brushed aside in the interests of a higher 
goal. The unresolved political situation is very near the surface, and it infects 
the rhetoric, or skews the accents of that scholarship, because the authors 
write from a position, it is true,ofknowledge and authoritative learning, but 
also from the position of people whose message of resistance and contesta­
tion is the historical result of subjugation. As Adorno says of the apparent 
mutilation of the language used in such circumstances, "The language of the 
subjected, on the other hand, domination alone has stamped, so robbing 
them further of the justice promised by the unmutilated, autonomous word 
to all those free enough to pronounce it without rancor." 153 
I do not mean to suggest that oppositional scholarship must be shrill and 
unpleasantly insistent, or that Antonius and james (or Guha and Alatas for 
that matter) punctuate their discourse with insults and accusations. I am only 
saying that scholarship and politics are more openly connected in these 
books because these writers think of themselves as emissaries to Western 
culture representing a political freedom and accomplishment as yet unful­
filled, blocked, postponed. To misinterpret the historical force of their 
statements, discourses, and interventions, to impugn rhem (as Conor Cruise 
o~Brien once did)154 as wailing for sympathy, to dismiss them as. emotional 
and subjective cris de coeur of strenuous activists and partisan politicians is 
to attenuate their force, to misrepresent their value, to dismiss their enor­
mous contribution to knowledge. No wonder Fanon said that "for the native, 
objectivity is always directed against him."ISS 
The temptation for metropolitan audiences has usually been to rule that 
these books, and others like them, are merely evidence of native literature 
written by "native informants," rather than coeval contributions to knowl­
edge. The authority in the West even of works like Antonius's andjames's 
has been marginalized because to Western professional scholars they seem 
to be ·written from outside looking in. Perhaps that is one reason why Guha The Voyage In and the Emergence of Opposition 2.59 
and Alatas, a generation later, choose to focus on rhetoric, ideas, and Ian~ 
guage rather than upon history tout court, preferring to analyze the verbal 
symptoms of power rather than its brute exercise, its processes and tactics 
rather than its sources, its intellectilal methods and enunciative techniques 
rather than its morality-to deconstruct rather than to destroy. 
To rejoin experience and culture is of course to read texts from the 
metropolitan center and from the peripheries contrapuntally, according 
neither the privilege of "objectivity" to "our side" nor the encumbrance of 
·"subjectivity" to "theirs."!S 6 The question is a matter ofknowing how ~o read, 
as the deconstructors say, and not detaching this from the issue ofknowing 
what to read. Texts are not finished objects. They are, as Williams once said, 
notations and cultural practices. And texts create not only their own prece­
dents, as Borges said of Kafka, but their successors. The great imperial 
experience of the past two hundred years is global and universal; it has 
implicated every corner of the globe, the colonizer and the colonized to­
gether. Because the West acquired world dominance, and because it seems 
to have completed its trajectory by bringing about "the end of history'; as 
Francis Fukuyama has called it, Westerners have assumed the integrity and 
the inviolability of their cultural masterpieces, their scholarship, their 
worlds of discourse; the rest of the world stands petitioning for atten~on at 
ou'r windowsill. Yet I believe it is a radical falsification of culture to strip it 
of its affiliations with its setting, or to pry it away from the terrain· it 
contested or-more to the point of an oppositional strand within Western 
culture--to deny its real influence. Jane Austen's M11n.rjield P11rlt is about 
England 11nd about Antigu!l, and the connection is made explicitly by Aus­
teil; it is therefore about order at home and slavery abroad, and can-indeed 
ought-to be read that way, with Eric Williams and C.L.R.James alongside 
the book. Similarly Camus and Gide write about precisely the same Algeria 
written about by Fanon and Kateb Yacine. 
If these ideas of counterpoint, intertwining, and integration have anything 
more to them than a blandly uplifting suggestion for catholicity of vision, it 
is that they reaffirm the historical experience of imperialism as a matter first 
of interdependent histories, overlapping domains, second of s~mething re­
quiring intellectual and political choices. If, for example, French and Al­
gerian or Vietnamese history, Caribbean or African or Indian and British 
history are studied separately rather than together, then the experiences of 
domination and being dominated remain artificially, and falsely, separated. 
And to consider imperial domination and resistance to it as a dual process 
evolving toward decolonization, then independence, is largely to align one­
self with the process, and to interpret both sides of the contest not only 
hermeneutically but also politically. 2.60 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
Such books as The Black Jacobinr, The Arab Awakening, A Rule of Property, and 
The Myth of the Lazy Native belong squarely in the contest itsel£ They make 
the interpretative choice clearer, harder to avoid. 
Consider the contemporary history of the Arab world as an instance of a 
history of continuing stress. Antonius's achievement was to establish that the 
interaction between Arab nationalism and the West (or its regional surro­
gates) was something to be studied and something to be either supported or 
fought. Subsequent to The Arab Awakening, especially in the United States, 
France, and Britain, the emergence of an academic field called "Middle 
Eastern studies" in anthropology, history, sociology, political science, eco­
nomics, and literature is related to the political tensions in the area and to 
the position of the two former colonial powers and the present superpower. 
Ever since the Second World War it has been impossible to evade either the 
Arab-Israeli conflict or the study of individual societies in academic "Middle 
Eastern studies." Thus to write about the Palestinian issue at all required one 
. to decide whether the Palestinians were a people (or national community), 
which in turn implied supporting or opposing their right to self~determina­
tion. For both sides, scholarship leads back to Antonius--accepting his views 
on the Western betrayal or, conversely, the West's right to have promised 
Palestine to the Zionist movement given the greater cultural importance of 
Zionism. IS? 
And this choice opens up others. On the one hand, can one with any other 
than a political or ideological justification speak of the modern "Arab mind," 
with its alleged propensity to violence, its culture of shame, the historical 
overdetermination oflslam, its political semantics, its degeneration vir-a-vit 
Judaism and Christianity? These notions produce such tendentious works as 
Raphael Patai's The Arab Mind, David Pryce-Jones's The Clored Circle, Ber­
nard Lewis's The Political l"anguage of lrlam, Patricia Crone and Michael 
Cook's Hagarirm. 158 They wear the clothing of scholarship, but none of these 
works moves outside the arena of struggle as first defined in the West by 
Antonius; none can be described as being free from hostility to the Arabs' 
collective aspiration to break out of the historical determinism developed in 
colonial perspectives. 
On the other hand, the critical and anti-Orientalist discourse of an older 
generation of scholars like Anwar Abdel-Malek and Maxime Rodinson 
continues with a younger generation that comprises Timothy Mitchell, 
Judith Tucker, Peter Gran, Rashid ai-Khalidi, and their counterparts in 
Europe. During the 198os the formerly conservative Middle East Studies 
Association underwent an important ideological transformation that,these 
people helped to bring about. Formerly aligned with and often staffed by 
mainline academics, oil company executives, governmental consultants and The Voyage In and the Emergence o/ Opposition 2.61 
employees, MESA openly took up issues of contemporary political signifi­
cance in its large annual meetings: the Iranian Revolution, the GulfW ar, the 
Palestinian intifada, the Lebanese Civil War, the Camp David Accords, the 
relationship between Middle East scholarship and political ideology-issues 
that had formerly been occluded or minimized in the studies of individuals 
like Lewis, Patai, plus more recently Walter Laqueur, Emmanuel Sivan, 
and Daniel Pipes. Academic work that advocated a policy line opposed to 
native Arab or Islamic nationalism had dominated professional and even 
journalistic discussion (as in such best-selling works of journalism-as­
instant-scholarship as Thomas Friedman's From Beirut to Jerusalem and David 
Shipler's Arab and Je7»), but that began to change. 
At the core of the "old" line was an essentialization of Arabs as basically, 
irrecusably, and congenitally "Other," and it took on racist overtones in its 
elaborations of an "Arab" anti-democratic, violent, and regressive attitude to 
the world. Central to this attitude was another factor, Israel, also a contribu­
tor to the polarity that was set up between democratic Israel and a homoge­
nously non-democratic Arab world, in which the Palestinians, dispossessed 
and exiled by Israel, came to represent "terrorism" and little beyond it. But 
now it was the precisely differentiated histories of various Arab peoples, 
societies, and formations that younger anti-Orientalist scholars put forward; 
in respecting the history of and developments within the Arab world, they 
restored to it a dynamic sense of the unfulfilled march toward independence, 
of human rights (especially those of women and disadvantaged minorities), 
and freedom from outside (often imperialist) interference and internal cor­
J;Uption or collaboration. 
What happened in the Middle East Studies Association therefore was a 
metropolitan story of cultural opposition to Western domination. It was 
matched by similar important changes in African, Indian, Caribbean, and 
Latin American studies. No longer were these fields commanded by ex­
colonial officers or a platoon of academics speaking the appropriate lan­
guage. Instead a new receptivity to both liberation movements and 
post-colonial criticism, and newly conscious opposition groups (the civil 
rights movements in America, the immigrant rights movement in the United 
Kingdom) effectively took away the monopoly of discourse held by Euro­
centric intellectuals and politicians. Here Basil Davidson, Terence Ranger, 
Johannes Fabian, Thomas Hodgkin, Gordon K. Lewis, Ali Mazrui, Stuart 
Hall were essential, their scholarship a catalyst for other scholars. And for 
all these people the inaugural work of the four scholars I have discussed 
here-their voyage in-was fundamental to the cultural coalition now being 
built between anti-imperialist resistance in the peripheries and oppositional 
culture of Europe and the United States. RESISTANCE AN.D OPPOSITION 
( v ) 
Collaboration, Independence, and Liberation 
A t a 1¢9-70 seminar on imperialism held at Oxford, Ronald Robinson's 
paper "Non-European Foundations of European Imperialism" was 
among the most interesting contributions. Along with Thomas Hodgkin's 
"African and Third World Theories of Imperialism," Robinson's "sugges­
tion" for theoretical and empirical study showed the influence of the many 
·post-colonial developments I have been mentioning: 
Any new theory must recognize that imperialism was as much a func­
tion of its victims' collaboration or non-collaboration-of their indige­
nous politics, as it was of European expansion .... Nor [without the 
voluntary or enforced cooperation of their governing elites and] with­
out indigenous collaboration, when the time came for it, could Euro­
peans have conquered and ruled their non-European empires. From 
the outset that rule was eontinuously resisted; just as continuously 
native mediation was needed to aven resistance or hold it down. 159· 
Robinson goes on to explore how in Egypt before r88z the pashas and the 
Khedive collaborated in permitting European penetration, after which, with 
the dramatic overshadowing of that sector by the Orabi nationalist rebellion, 
the British occupied the country militarily. He might have.added, although 
he does· not, that many of the classes and individuals collaborating with 
imperialism began by trying to emulate modern European ways, to modern­
ize according to what was perceived of as European advancement. During 
the first two decades of the nineteenth century, Muhammad Ali sent mis­
sions to Europe, three decades before Japanese missions came to the United 
States and Europe for the same purpose. Within the French colonial orbit, 
gifted students were brought to France to be educated until as late as the 
r92.os and 1930s, although some of them, like Senghor and Cesaire and many 
Indochinese intellectuals, turned into vigorous opponents of empire. 
The primary purpose of these early missions to the West was to learn the 
ways of the advanced white man, translate his works, pick up his habits. 
Recent studies of the subject by Masao Miyoshi (Ar We Saw Them) and 
lbrahiin Abu-Lughod (The Arab Redircovery of &rope)' 60 show how the impe-Collaboration, ltldependence, and Liberation 
rial hierarchy was imparted to eager srildents from the East along with 
information, useful texts, and profitable habits.161 
Out of this particular dynamic of dependency came the first long reactive 
experience of nativist anti-imperialism, typified in the exchange published 
in 1883 between Afghani and Ernest Renan in the Revue tk deux montier, in 
which the native, using terms defined in advance by Renan, tries to "dis­
prove" the European's racist and culturally arrogant assumptions about his 
inferiority. Whereas Renan speaks of Islam's status as lower than that of 
Judaism and Christianity, Afghani asserts that Islam is "better,'' and claims 
thatthe West improved itself by borrowing from the Muslims. Afghani also 
argues that Islamic development in science occurred earlier than its Western 
counterpart, and, if there was anything regressive about the religion, it came 
from something common to all religions, an irreconcilability with science. 11i2 
Afghani's tone is amiable, even though he clear(y opposes Renan. ·In 
contrast to later resisters of imperialism-for whom liberation is the key 
theme-Afghani, like Indian lawyers in the 188os, belongs to a stratum of 
people who while lighting for their communities try to lind' a place for 
themselves within the cultural framework they share with the West. They 
are the elites who in leading the various nationalist independence move­
mentS have authority handed on to them by the colonial power: thus Mount­
batten to Nehru, or de Gaulle to the FLN. To this sort of antagonistic 
collaboration belong such different configurations ofculmral dependency as 
Western advisers· whose work helped native peoples or nations to "rise" (one 
aspect has been well chronicled in Jonathan Spence's book on Western 
advisers, To Change China), and those Western champions of the oppressed­
Mrs. Jellyby is an early caricature, members of the Liverpool School a later 
example-who represented their own versions of the natives' interest. An­
other example is in the competition between T. E. Lawrence and Louis 
Massignon immediately after World War One, described With great subtlety 
in an essay by Albert HoU:rani} 63 Each man had a genuine empathy with the 
Arabs who fought against the Ottomans during the war (indeed, Massignon 
made empathy with Islam the very center of his theory of the monotheistic 
community, the Abrahamic succession), yet out ofimperial conviction each 
acted his part in the partitioning of the Arab world between France and 
Britain: Lawrence served Britain, Massignon France, for the Arabs. 
An entire massive chapter in cultural history across live continents grows 
out of this kind of collaboration between natives on the one hand and 
conventional as well as eccentric and contradictory representatives of impe­
rialism on the other. In paying respect to it, acknowledging the shared and 
combined experiences that produced many of us, we must at the same time RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
note how at its center it nevertheless preserved the nineteenth-century 
imperial divide between native and Westerner. The many colonial schools 
in the Far East, India, the Arab world, East and West Mrica, for example, 
taught generations of the native bourgeoisie important truths about history, 
science, culture. And out of that learning process millions grasped the 
fundamentals of modem life, yet remained subordinate dependents of a 
foreign imperial authority. 
The culmination of this dynamic of dependence is the nationalism that 
finally produced independent states in the once colonial countries across the 
globe. Two political factors whose importance had already been registered 
in culture now marked off the end of the period of nationalist anti-imperial­
ism and inaugurated the era of liberationist anti-imperialist resistance. One 
was a pronounced awareness of culture as imperialism, the reflexive moment 
of consciousness that enabled the newly independent citizen to assert the 
end of Europe's cultural claim to guide and/or instruct the non-European. 
The second was the dramatically prolonged Western imperial mission in 
various regions that I have already mentioned, principally Algeria, Vietnam, 
Palestine, Guinea, and Cuba. But liberation, as distinguished from national­
ist independence, became the strong new theme, a theme already implicit 
in earlier works by people like Marcus Garvey,Jose Marti, and W.E.B. Du 
Bois, for instance, but now requiring the propulsive infusion of theory and 
sometimes armed, insurrectionary militancy. 
The national identity struggling to free itself from imperialist domination 
found itself lodged in, and apparently fulfilled by, the state. Armies, flags, 
legislatures, schemes of national education, and dominant (if not single) 
political parties resulted and usually in ways that gave the nationalist elites 
the places once occupied by the British or the French. Basil Davidson's 
important distinction between mass mobilization (the huge Indian crowds 
who demonstrated in the streets of Calcutta, for example) and mass participa­
ti<Jn highlights the distinction between the nationalist elite and the rural and 
urban masses who were briefly an organic pan of the nationalist prbject. 
What Yeats does in Ireland is to help create a sense of restored commu­
nity-an Ireland regaled by "a company that sang, to sweeten Ireland's 
wrong, Ballad and story, rann and song" 164-but at its center stands a select 
group of men and women. 
When the new national state gets established, argues Partha Chatterjee, 
it is ruled not by prophets and romantic rebels but, in India's case, by Nehru, 
"a state-builder, pragmatic and self-conscious." 16' To him the peasants and 
the urban poor are ruled by passions, not reason; they can be mobilized by 
poets like Tagore and charismatic presences like Gandhi, but after indepen­
dence this large number of people ought to be absorbed irito the state, to be Collaboration, Independence, and Liberation 
made fUnctional in its development. Yet Chatterjee makes the interesting 
point that by transforming nationalism into a new regional or state ideology, 
post-colonial countries subjected themselves to a global process of rationali­
zation based on external norms, a process governed in the post-war years of 
modernization and development by the logic of a world system whose type 
is global capitalism, commanded at the top by the handful of leading indus­
trial countries. 
Chatterjee is correct to say that "no matter how skillfully employed, 
inodem statecraft and the application of modem technology cannot effec"'­
tively suppress the very real tensions which remain unresolved." 166 The new 
pathology of power, in Eqbal Ahmad's phrase, gives rise to national security 
states, to dictatorships, oligarchies, one-party systems. In V. S. Naipaul's 
novel A Bend in the River ( 1979) an unnamed African country is ruled by a Big 
Man, neither named nor present, wlio manipulates European consultants, 
Indian and Muslim minorities, and his own tribespeople in and out of rigid 
nativist doctrine (this is like the cult of Q;lddafi's Green Book or Mobutu's 
invented tribal traditions); by the end of the book many of his subjects have 
been mercilessly killed; the one or two who survive the onslaught and 
realize what is happening-like. Salim, the protagonist--decide that the 
simation is hopeless and yet another emigration is required. (From an East 
African Muslim Indian family, Salim drifts into the interior ruled by the Big 
Man, then leaves the place forlorn and completely dejected.) Naipaul's 
ideological point is that the triumph of nationalism in the Third World not 
only "suppresses the very real tensions ... unresolved" in the post-coloniaf 
state, but also eliminates the last hope of resistance against it, as well as the 
las~ civilizing traces of Western infiuence. 
Naipaul, a remarkably gifted travel writer and novelist, successfully 
dramatizes an ideological position in the West from which it is possible to 
indict the post-colonial states for having succeeded unconditionally in gain­
ing independence. His attack on the post-colonial world· for its religious 
fanaticism (in Among the Believers), degenerate politics (in Guerrillas), and 
fundamental inferiority (in his first two books on India) 167 is a part of a 
disenchantment with the Third World that overtook many people during 
the 197os and 198os, among them several prominent Western proponents of 
Third World nationalism, like Conor Cruise O'Brien, Pascal Bruckner (The 
Tears of the White Man), and Gerard Chaliand. In an interesting semi­
documentary history of the earlier French 11upport for Third World resis­
tance, Aux Origines des tiers-mondi.rmes: Colonists et anti-coloniali.rtes en France 
(i~I~I~J~). Claude Liauzu ventures the thesis that by 1975 an anti-imperialist 
block no longer existed as it had earlier. 168 The disappearance of a domestic 
opposition to imperialism is a plausible argument about mainstream France 2.66 RESISTANCE AN.D OPPOSITION 
and perhaps also the Atlantic West generally, but it is not helpful about 
persisting sites of contention, whether in the new states or in less prominent 
sectors of metropolitan culture. ~estions of power and authority once 
directed at the classical empires of Britain and France are now thrown at 
despotic successor regimes, and against the idea that African or Asian .coun­
tries should remain in thrall and dependency. 
The evidence for this is dramatic. The struggle in behalf of human and 
democratic rights continues in, to name only a few places, Kenya, Haiti, 
Nigeria, Morocco, Pakistan, Egypt, Burma, Tunisia, and El Salvador. Also, 
the increasing significance of the women's movement has put more pressures 
on oligarchical statism and military (or one-party) rule. In addition the 
oppositional culture still maintains links between the Western and the 
non-European world: one first sees evidence of the connection in, for in­
stance, Cesaire's affiliations with Marxism and surrealism, and later in the 
connection between Subaltern Studies and Gramsci and Barthes. Many intel­
lectuals in the formerly colonized world .have refused to settle for the 
unhappy fate ofNaipaul's Indar, once a promising young provincial who is 
sought out by foundations in the United States, but now a discarded and 
hopeless person with no place to go. 
From rime to time that is all he knows, that it is time for him to go 
home. There is some dream village in his head. In between he does the 
lowest kind of job. He knows he is equipped for better things, but he 
doesn't want to do them. I believe he enjoys being told he can do better. 
We've given up now. He doesn't want to risk anything again. 169 
Indar is one of the "new men," a Third World intellectual who springs to 
undeserved prominence when fickle enthusiasts in the First World are in the 
mood to support insurgent nationalist movements, but loses out when they 
become less enthusiastic. 
Is that an accurate representation of what resistance politics and culture 
were all about? Was the radical energy that propelled Algerians- and Indians 
1 into mass insurrection finally contained and extinguished by independence? 
No, because nationalism was only one of the aspects of resistance, and not 
the most interesting or enduring one. 
Indeed, that we can see and judge nationalist history so severely is a 
testam'ent to the radically, new perspective offered on the entire experience 
of historical imperialism by a deeper opposition; it comes positively from the 
decentering doctrines of Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche; and negatively from 
the insufficiencies of nationalist ideology. It infuses Aime Cesaire's Discourse 
on Colonialism, in which the ideologies of colonial dependency and Black Collaboration, lndejJendmce, and LiberatiOn 
racial inferiority are shown to have been incorporated surreptitiously into 
the modern jargon of psychiatry, which ill turn permits Cesaire to use iti 
underlying deconstructive theoretical force to undermine its own imperial 
authority. Nationalist culture has been sometimes dramatically outpaced 
by a fertile culture of resistance whose core is energetic insurgency, a 
"technique of trouble," directed against the authority and the discourse of 
imperialism. 
Yet this does not happen all or even most of the time, alas. All nationalist 
cultures depend heavily on the concept of national identity, and· nationalist 
politics is a politics of identity: Egypt for the Egyptians, Africa. for the 
Africans, India for the Indians, and so on. What Basil Davidson 'calls nation­
alism's "ambiguous fertility" 170 creates not only the assertion of a once 
incomplete and suppressed but finally restored identity through· national 
systems of education, but also the inculcation of new authority. This is 
equally true in the United States, where the tonic force of African-American, 
women's and minority expression has here and there been turned into· 
doctrine, as if the wish to criticize the myth of white America also meant the 
need to supplant that myth with dogmatic new ones. 
In Algeria; for example, the French forbade Arabic as a formal language 
of instruction or administration; after 1962 the FLN made it understandably 
the only such language, and set in place a new system of Arab-Islamic 
education. The FLN then proceeded politically to absorb the whole of 
Algerian civil society: within three decades this alignment of state and party 
authority with a restored identity ·caused not only the monopolization of 
~ost political practices by one party and the almost complete erosion of 
democratic life, but, on the right wing, the challenging appearance of an 
Islamic ·opposition, favoring a militantly Muslim Algerian identity based on 
Koranic (shari'ah) principles. By the 199os the country was in a state of crisis, 
whose result has been a deeply impoverishing face-olfbetween government, 
which abrogated the results of the election as well as most free political 
activity, and the Islamic movement, which appeals to the past and orthodoxy 
f01: its authority. Both sides claim the right to rule Algeria. 
In his chapter on "the pitfalls of nationalist consciousness" in The Wretched 
of the EArth; Fanon foresaw this turn of events: His notion was that unless. 
national consciousness at its moment of success was somehow changed into 
a social consciousness, the future would hold not liberation but an extension 
of imperialism. His theory of violence is not meant to answer the appeals of 
a native chafing under the paternalistic surveillance of a European police­
man and, in a sense, preferring the services of a native officer in his place: 
On the contrary, it first represents colonialism as a totalizing system nour­
ished in the same way-Fanon's implicit analogy is devastating-that 268 ·RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
human behavior is informed by unconscious desires. In a second, quasi­
Hegelian move, a Manichean opposite appears, the insurrectionary native, 
tired of the logic that reduces him, the geography that segregates him, the 
ontology that dehumanizes him, the epistemology that strips him down to 
an unregenerate essence. "The violence of the colonial regime and counter­
violence of the native balance each other and respond to each other in an 
extraordinary reciprocal homogeneity." 171 The struggle must be lifted to a 
new level of contest, a synthesis represented by a war of liberation, for which 
an entirely new post-nationalist theoretical culture is required. 
If I have so often cited Fanon, it is because more dramatically and 
decisively than anyone, I believe, he expresses the immense cultural shift 
fr()m the terrain of nationalist independence to the theoretical domain of 
liberation. This shift takes place mainly where imperialism lingers on in 
Africa after most other colonial states have gained independence, e.g., Alge­
ria and Guinea-Bissau. In any case Fanon is unintelligible without grasping 
that his work is a response to theoretical elaborations produced by the 
culture of late Western capitalism, received by the Third World native 
intellectual as a culture of oppression and colonial enslavement. The whole 
ofF anon's oeuvre is his attempt to overcome the obduracy of those very same 
theoretical elaborations by an act of political will, to turn them back against 
their authors so as to be able, in the phrase he borrows from Cesaire, to 
invent new souls. 
Fanon penetratingly links the settler's conquest of history with imperial­
ism's regime of truth, over which the great myths of Western culture 
preside: 
The settler makes history; his life is an epoch, an Odyssey. He is the 
absolute beginning. "This land was created by us"; he is the unceasing 
cause: "If we leave all is lost, and the country will go back to the Middle 
Ages." Over against him torpid creatures, wasted by fevers, obsessed by 
ancestral customs, form an almost inorganic background for the in­
novating dynamism of colonial mercantilism. 172 
As Freud excavated the subterranean foundations of the edifice ofWest­
ern reason, as Marx and Nietzsche interpreted the reified data of bourgeois 
society by translating them back into primitive but productive impulses 
toward dominance and accumulation, so Fanon reads Western humanism by 
transporting the large hectoring bolus of"the Greco-Latin pedestal" bodily 
to the colonial wasteland, where "this artificial sentinel is turned into 
dust." 173 It cannot survive juxtaposition with its quotidian debasement by 
European settlers. In the subversive gestures of Fanon's writing is a highly Collahoration, Independence, and Liberation 
conscious man deliberately as well as ironically repeating the tactics of the 
culture he believes has oppressed him. The difference between Freud, Marx, 
and Nietzsche on the one hand and Fanon's "native intellectual" on the 
other is that the belated colonial thinker fixes his predecessors geograph­
ically-they are ofthe West-the better to liberate their energies from the 
oppressing cultural matrix that produced them. By seeing them antitheti­
cally as intrinsic to the colonial system and at the same time potentially at 
war with it, Fanon performs an act of closure on the empire and announces 
·a new era. National consciousness, he says, "must now be enriched and 
deepened by a very rapid transformation into a consciousness of social and 
political needs, in other words, into [real] humanism." 174 
How odd the word "humanism" sounds in this context, where it is free 
from the narcissistic individualism, divisiveness, and colonialist egoism of 
the imperialism that justified the white man's rule. Like Cesaire's in his 
Retour, Fanon's reconceived imperialism is in its positive dimension a collec­
tive act reanimating and redirecting an inert mass of silent natives into a new 
inclusive conception of history. 
This huge task, which consists of re-introducing mankind into the 
world, the whole of mankind, will be carried out with the indispensable 
help of the European peoples, who themselves must realize that in the 
past they have often joined the ranks of our common masters where 
colonial questions are concerned. To achieve this, the European peo­
ples must first decide to wake up and shake themselves, use their brains, 
and stop playing the stupid faun of the Sleeping Beauty. 175 
How this can be enacted takes us from the apparent exhortations and 
prescriptions to the extraordinarily interesting structure and method of The 
Wretched of the l!.arth. Fanon's achievement in this his last work (published in 
1961, a few months after his death) is first to represent colonialism and 
nationalism in their Manichean contest, then to enact the birth of an inde­
pendence movement, finally to transfigure that movement into what is in 
effect a trans-personal and trans-national force. The visionary and innova­
tive quality ofF anon's final work derives from the remarkable subtlety with 
which he forcibly deforms imperialist culture and its nationalist antagonist in 
the process of looking beyond both toward liberation. Like Cesaire before 
him, Fanon impugns imperialism for what it has created by acts of powerful 
rhetorical and structured summary. These make clear imperialism's long 
cultural history, and-more tellingly-aHow Fanon to formulate new 
strategies and goals for liberation. 
The Wretched of the Earth is a hybrid work-part essay, part imaginative RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
story, part philosophical analysis, part psychological case history, part na­
tionalist allegory, part visionary transcendence of history. It hegins with a 
territorial sketch of the colonial space, separated into the clean, well-lighted 
. European city and the dark, fetid, ill-lit casbah. From this Manichean and 
physically grounded stalemate Fanon's entire work follows, set in motion, so 
to speak, by the native's violence, a force imended to bridge the gap between 
white and non-white. For Fanon violence, as I said earlier, .is the synthesis 
that overcomes the reification of white man as subject, Black man as object. 
My conjecture is that while he was writing the work Fanon read Lukacs's 
History and Clast Conrciourneu, which had just appeared in Paris in French 
translation in 196o. Lukacs shows that the effects of capitalism are fragmenta­
tion and reification: in such a dispensation, every human being becomes an 
object, or commodity, the product of human work is alienated from its 
maker, the image of whole or of CC)mmunity disappears entirely. Most 
important to the insurgent and heretical Marxism put forward by Lukacs 
(shortly after publication in 19.13 the hook was removed from circulation by 
Lukacs himself) was the separation of subjective consciousness from the 
world of objectS. This, he says, could he ov~rcome by an act of mental will, 
by which one lonely mind could join ap.other by imagining the common 
bond between them, breaking the ·enforced rigidity that kept human beings 
as slaves to tyrannical outside forces. Hence reconciliation and synthesis 
between subject and object. 
Fanon's violence, by which the native overcomes the division between 
whites and natives, corresponds very closely to Lukacs's thesis about over­
coming fragmentation by an act of will; Lukacs calls this "no single, un­
repeatable tearing of the veil that masks the process but the unbroken 
alternation of ossification, contradiction and movement" 176 Thus the sub­
ject-object reification in its prison-like immobility is destroyed. Fanon 
adopts much of this extrem~ly audacious thesis, which is oppositional even 
within oppositional Marxism, in passages like the following, where the 
settler's consciousness functions like that of a capitalist, turning human 
workers into inhuman and non-conscious objects: 
The settler makes history and is conscious of making it·And.hecause 
he constantly refers to the history of his mother country, he clearly 
indicates that he himself is the extension of that mother country. Thus 
the history which he writes is not the history of the country which he 
. plunders but the history of his own nation in regard 'to all that she skins 
off, all that she violates and. starves. 
The immobility [later he speaks ofapartheid as one of ~he forms of 
"division into compartments": "The native," he adds, "is being hemmed Collaboration, Independence, .. and Liberation 
in .... The first thing which a native learns is to stay in his place"] 177 
to which the native is condemned can only be called in question if the 
native decides to put an end to the history of colonization-the history 
of pillage-and to bring into existence the history of the nation-the 
history of decolonization.' 7a 
In Fanon's world change can come about only when the native, like 
Lukacs's alienated worker, decides that colonization must end-in other 
· words; there must be an epistemological revolution. Only then can there be 
movement. At this point enters violence, "a cleansing force," which pits 
colonizer against colonized directly: 
The violence of the colonial regime and the counter-violence of the 
native balance each other and respond to each other in an extraOrdi­
nary reciprocal homogeneity .... The setder's work is to make even 
dreams of liberty impossible for the native. The native's work is to 
imagine all possible methods for destroying the settler. On the logical 
plane, the Manicheanism of the settler produces a Manicheanism of the 
natives, to the theory of the "absolute evil of the native" the theory of 
the "absolute evil of the settler" replies. 179 
Here Fanon is not only reshaping colonial experience in terms suggested 
by Lukacs, but also characterizing the emergenrcultural and political antag­
onist to imperialism. His imagery for this emergence is biological: 
The appearance of the settler has meant in the terms of syncretism 
the death of the aboriginal society, cultural lethargy, and the petrifica­
tion of individuals. For the native, life can only spring up again out of 
the rotting corpse of the settler .... But it so happens that for the 
colonized people this violence, because it constitutes their only work, 
invests their character with positive and creative qualities. The practice 
of violence binds them together as a whole, since each individual forms 
a violent link in the great chain, a part of the great organism of 
violence. 180 
Certainly Fanon depends here on the earlier language of French colonial­
ism, in which publicists like Jules Harmand and Leroy~Beaulieu used the 
biological imagery of birth, parturition, and genealogy to describe the paren­
tal relationship of France to its colonial children. Fanon reverses things, 
using that language for the birth of a new nation, and the language of death 
for the colonial settler-state. Even this antagonism, however, does not cover RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
all the differences that spring up once revolt begins and "life [appears to be] 
an unending contest." 181 There are the major divisions between legal and 
illegal nationalism, between the politics of nationalist reform and simple 
decolonization on the one hand, and the illicit politics of liberation on the 
other. 
These divisions are just as important as the one between colonized and 
colonizer (whose motif is taken up, altogether more simply, by Alben 
Memmi.) 182 Indeed the true prophetic genius of The Wretched of the Earth is 
located precisely here: Fanon senses the divide between the nationalist 
bourgeoisie in Algeria and the FLN's liberationist tendencies, and he also 
establishes conflicting narrative and historical patterns. Once the insurrec­
tion gets under way, the nationalist elites try to establish parity with France: 
demands for human rights, self-rule, labor unions, and so on. And since 
French imperialism called itself "assimilationist," the official nationalist par­
ties are trapped into becoming co-opted agents of the ruling authorities. 
(Such, for example, was the sad fate of Farhat Abbas, who as he gained in 
official French approval lost any hope of winning mass support.) Thus 
official bourgeois nationalists simply drop into the narrative pattern of the 
Europeans, hoping to become mimic men, in Naipaul's phrase, mere native 
correspondences of their imperial masters. 
Fanon's brilliant analysis of the liberationist tendency opens Chapter 2., 
"Spontaneity: Its Strength and Weakness," the basis of which is a time lag 
and rhythm difference ( dlcalage) "between the leaders of a nationalist party 
and the mass of the people." 183 As the nationalists copy their methods from 
Western political partie$, all sorts of tensions develop within the nationalist 
camp-between country and city, between leader and rank .. and-tile, be­
tween bourgeoisie and peasants, between feudal and political leaders--all of 
them exploited by the imperialists. The core problem is that, although 
official nationalists want to break colonialism, "another quite different will 
[becomes apparent]: that of coming to a friendly agreement with it."184 
Thereafter an illegal group asks questions about this policy, and it is quickly 
isolated, often imprisoned. 
So we can observe the process whereby the rupture runs b~ween the 
illegal and legal tendencies within the party ... and an underground 
party, an offshoot of the legal party, will be the result. 185 
Fanon's method for showing the effect of this underground party is to 
dramatize its existence as a counter-narrative, an underground narrative, set 
in motion by fugitives, outcasts, hounded intellectuals who flee to the Collaboration, Independence, and Liberation 273 
countryside and in their work and organization clarify and also undermine 
the weaknesses of the official narrative of nationalism. Far from leading 
the colonized people to supreme sovereignty at one fell swoop, that 
certainty which you had that all portions of the nation would be carried 
along with you at the same speed and led onward by the same light, that 
strength which gave you hope:· all now are seen in the light of experi­
ence to be symptoms of a very great weakness. 186 
Precisely that power to convey "the light of experience" is located in the 
illegal tendency animating the liberationist party. This party shows to all 
that racialism and revenge "cannot sustain a war of liberation"; hence the 
native makes "the discovery" that in "breaking down colonial oppression he 
is automatically building up yet another system of exploitation," this time 
giving it "a black face or an Arab one," so long as the mimic men lead. 
"History teaches clearly," remarks Fanon at this point, "that the battle 
against colonialism does not run straight away along the lines of national­
ism."187 In the image of the "lines of nationalism," Fanon understands that 
conventional narrative is, as we noted in Conrad's work, central to imperial­
,ism's appropriative and dominative attributes. Narrative itself is the repre­
sentation of power, and its teleology is associated with the global role of the 
West. Fanon was the first major theorist of anti-imperialism to realize that 
orthodox nationalism followed along the same track hewn out by imperial­
ism, which while it appeared to be conceding authority to the nationalist 
bpurgeoisie was really extending its hegemony. To tell a simple national 
story therefore is to repeat, extend, and also to engender new forms of 
imperialism. Left to itself, nationalism after independence will "crumble into 
regionalisms inside the hollow shell of nationalism itsel£."118 The ol4 con" 
flicts between regions are now repeated, privileges are monopolized by one 
people over another, and the hierarchies and divisions constituted by impe­
rialism are reinstated, only now they are presided over by Algerians, 
Senegalese, Indians, and so forth. 
Unless, Fanon says a little later, "a rapid step ... [is] taken from national 
consciousness to political and social consciousness." 189 He means first of all 
that needs based on identitarian (i.e., nationalist) consciousness must be 
overridden. New and general collectivities--African, Arab, Islamic-should 
have precedence over particularist ones, thus setting up lateral, non-narra­
tive connections among people whom imperialism separated into autono­
mous tribes, narratives, cultures. Second-here Fanon follows some of 
Lukacs's ideas--the center (capital city, official culture, appointed leader) RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
must· be deconsecrated and demystified. A new system of mobile relation­
ships must replace the hierarchies inherited from imperialism. In passages of 
an incandescent power, Fanon resorts to poetry and drama, to Rene Char 
and Keita Fodeba. Liberation is consciousness of self, "not the closing of a 
door to communication" 190 but a never-ending process of "discovery and 
encouragement" leading to true national self-liberation and to universalism. 
One has the impression in reading the final pages of The Wretched of the 
Earth that having committed himself to combat both imperialism and ortho­
dox nationalism by a . counter-narrative of great deconstructive power, 
Fanon could not ma·ke the complexity and anti-identitarian force of that 
.'counter-narrative explicit. But in the obscurity and difficulty of Fanon's 
prose, there are enough poetic and visionary suggestions to make the case 
for liberation as a process and not as a goal contained automatically by the 
newly independent nations. Throughout The Wretched of the Earth (written 
in French), Fanon wants somehow to bind the E~ropean as well as the 
native together in a new non-adversarial community of awareness and anti­
imperialism. 
In Fanon's imprecations· against and solicitations of European attention, 
we lind much the same cultural energy that we see in the fiction ofNgugi, 
Achebe; and Salih. Its messages are we must strive to liberate all man­
kind from imperialism; we must all write our histories and cultures rescrip­
rively in a new way; we share the same history, even though for some of 
us that history has enslaved. This, in short, is writing from the colonies co­
terminous with the real potential of post-colonial liberation. Algeria was 
liberated, as were Kenya and the Sudan. The important connections with the 
formedmperial powers remain, as does a newly clarified sense of what can 
and cannot be relied on or salvaged from that former relationship. Once 
again it is culture and cultural effort that presage the course of things to 
come-well in advance of the cultural politics of the post-colonial period 
dominated by the United States, the surviving superpower. 
Since much of the literature of resistance was written in the thick of battle, 
there is an understandable tendency to concentrate on its combative, often 
strident 1assertiveness. Or to see in it a blueprint for the horrors of the Pol 
Pot regime. On the one hand, .a recent spate of articles on Fanon has looked 
at him strictly as a preacher calling the oppressed to violence, and violence 
only. Little is said about French colonial violence; according to the strident 
polemics of Sidney Hook, Fanon is nothing more than an irrational, finally 
stupid enemy of "the West." On the other hand, it is hard to miss in Amflcar 
Cabral's remarkable speeches and tracts the extraordinary intensity of the 
man's mobilizing force, his animosity and violence, the way ressentiment and 
hate keep turning up-all the more evident against the particularly ugly Collaboration, !~dependence, and Liberation 
backdrop of Portuguese colonialism. Yet one would seriously misread such 
texts as "The Weapons of Theory" or "National Liberation and Culture" if 
one missed Cabral's enabling utopianism and theoretical generosity, just as 
it is a misreading ofF anon not to see in him something considerably beyond 
a celebration of violent conflict. For both Cabral and Fanon, the emphasis 
on "armed struggle" is at most tactical. For Cabral the liberation gained by 
violence, organization, and militancy is required· because· imperialism has 
sequestered the non-European away from experiences·that have been per­
mitted only to the white man. But, says Cabral, "the time is· past when, in 
an attempt to perpetuate the domination of peoples, culture .was regarded 
as an attribute of privileged peoples or nations and when, out of ignorance 
or bad faith, culture was confused with technical skill, if not with the colour 
of one's skin or the shape of one's eyes." 191 To end those barriers ino admit 
the non-European to the whole range of human experience; at .least all 
humankind can have a destiny and, more important, a history. 
Certainly, as I said earlier, cultural resiStance to imperialism has often 
taken the form of what we can call nativism used as a private refuge. One 
finds this not only in Jabarti, but in the great early hero of Algerian resi~­
tance, the Emir Abdel Kader, a nineteenth-century warrior who, while 
fighting the French armies of occupation, also cultivated a cloistral spiritual 
apprenticeship to the thirteenth-century Sufi master Ibn Arabi. 192 To fight 
against the distortions inflicted on your identity in this way is to return to 
a pre-imperial period to locate a "pure" native culture. This is quite a 
different thing from revisionist interpretations, such as those of Guha or 
C~omsky, whose purpose is to demystify the interests at work in establish­
ment scholars who specialize in "backward" cultures, and to appreciate the 
complexity of the interpretative process. In a way, the nativist argues that 
one can get past all interpretation to the pure phenomenon, a literal fact 
beseeching assent and confirmation, rather than debate and investigation. 
Something of this passionate intensity is found in blanket condemnations of 
"the West" such as Jalal Ali Ahmad's Occidentosit: A Plague ftvm the West 
(t961-62) 19J or in Wole Soyinka implying the existence of a pure native 
African (as in his unfortunate attack on Islam and the Arabs as defacing the 
Mrican experience); 194 one can see that intensity put more interestingly and 
productively to use in Anwar Abdel-Malek's proposal about "civilizational 
projects" and the theory of endogamous cultures} 9s 
I am not particularly interested in spending much time discussing the 
altogether obvious unhappy cultural consequences of nationalism in Iraq, 
Uganda, Zaire, Libya, the Philippines, Iran, and throughout Latin America. 
Nationalism's disabling capacities have been lingered over and caricatured 
quite long enough by a large army of commentators, expert and amateur RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
alike, for whom the non-Western world after the whites left it seems to have 
become little more than a nasty mix of tribal chieftains, despotic barbarians, 
and mindless fundamentalists. A more interesting commentary on the nativ­
ist tendency-and the rather naive foundationalist ideology that makes it 
possible-is provided in such accounts of creole or mestizo culture as in 
Rod6's Ariel and by those Latin American fabulists whose texts demonstrate 
the manifest impurity, the fascinating mixture of real and surreal in all 
experience. As one reads "magic realists" like Carpentier, who first describes 
it, Borges, Garda Marquez, and Fuentes, one vividly apprehends the dense 
interwoven strands of a history that mocks linear narrative, easily recuper­
ated "essences," and the dogmatic mimesis of "pure" representation. 
At its best, the culture of opposition and resistance suggests a theoretical 
alternative and a practical method for reconceiving human experience in 
non-imperialist terms. I say the tentative "suggests" rather than the more 
confident "provides" for reasons that will, I hope, become evident 
Let me quickly recapitulate the main points of my argument first The 
ideological and cultural war against imperialism occurs in the form of 
resistance in the colonies, and later, as resistance spills over into Europe and 
the United States, in the form of opposition or dissent in the metropolis. The 
first phase of this dynamic produces nationalist independence movements, 
the second; later, and more acute phase produces liberation struggles. The 
basic premise of this analysis is that although the imperial divide in fact 
separates metropolis from peripheries, and although each cultural discourse 
unfolds according to different agendas, rhetorics, and images, they are in fact 
connected, if not always in perfect correspondence. The Raj required Babus, 
just as later the Nehrus and the Gandhis took over the India set up by the 
British. The connection is made on the cultural level since, I have been 
saying, like all cultural practices the imperialist experience is an intertwined 
and overlapping one. Not only did the colonizers emulate as well as compete 
with one another, but so also did the colonized, who often went from the 
same general type of "primary resistance" to similar nationalist parties 
seeking sovereignty and independence. 
But is that all imperialism and its enemies have brought forward, a 
ceaseles~ round of impositions and counter-impositions, or is a new horizon 
opened up? 
There can be little doubt that were they alive today Fanon and Cabral, 
for example, would be hugely disappointed at the results of their efforts. I 
make that speculation considering their work as a theory not just of resis­
tance and decolonization, but ofliberation. In all sorts of ways, the somewhat 
inchoate historical forces, confusing antitheses, unsynchronized events that 
their work tried to articulate were not fully controlled or rendered by it Collaboration, Independence, and Liberation 
Fanon turned out to be right about the rapacity and divisiveness of national 
bourgeoisies, but he did not and could not furnish an institutional, or even 
theoretical, antidote for its ravages. 
But it is not as state builders or, as the awful expression has it, founding 
fathers that the greatest resistance writers like Fanon and Cabral should be 
read and interpreted. Although the struggle for national liberation is contin­
uous with national independence, it is not-and in my opinion never was-­
culturally continuous with it. To read Fanon and Cabral, or C.L.R. James 
and George Lamming, or Basil Davidson and Thomas Hodgkin merely as 
so many John the Baptists of any number of ruling parties or foreign-office 
experts is a travesty. Something else was going on, and it sharply disrupts, 
then abruptly veers away from the unity forged between imperialism and 
culture. Why is this difficult to perceive? 
For one, the theory and theoretical structures suggested by writers on 
liberation are rarely given the commanding authority-I mean the phrase 
quite literally-or blithe universalism of their contemporary, mostly West­
ern counterparts. There are many reasons for this, not the least being the one 
I mentioned in my previous chapter, that very much like the narrative 
devices in Heart of Darkness, many cultural theories pretending to universal­
ism assume and incorporate the inequality of races, the subordination of 
inferior cultures, the acquiescence of those who, in Marx's words, cannot 
represent themselves and therefore must be represented by others. "Hence," 
says the Moroccan scholar Abdullah Laroui, "the Third World intelli­
gentsia's condemnations of cultural imperialism. Sometimes people are puz­
zled by the ill-treatment meted out to the old liberal paternalism, to Marx's 
Eb.ropocentrism, and to structuralist anti-racism (Levi-Strauss). This is be­
cause they are unwilling to see how these ca9 form pan of the same 
hegemonic system." 196 Or, as Chinua Achebe puts it, when remarking that 
Western critics o~n fault African writing for lacking "universality": 
Does it ever occur to these universalists to try out their game of 
changing names of characters and places in an American novel, say, a 
Philip Roth or an Updike, and slotting in African names just to see how 
it works? But of course it would not occur to them to doubt the 
universality of their own literature. In the nature of things the work of 
a Western writer is automatically informed by universality. It is only 
others who must strain to achieve it. So-and-so's work is universal: he 
has truly arrived! As though universality were some distant bend in the 
road which you may take if you travel out far enough in. the direction 
of Europe or America, if you put adequate distance between yourself 
and your home.l 97 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
As an instructive reminder of this unfortunate state of affairsj consider the 
roughly contemporary work of Michel Foucault and Frantz Fanon, both of 
whom stress the unavoidable problematic of immobilization and confine­
ment at the center of the Western system of knowledge and discipline. 
Fanon's work programmatically seeks to treat colonial and metropolitan 
societies together, as discrepant but related entities, while Foucault's work 
moves further and further away from serious consideration of social wholes, 
focussing instead upon the individual as dissolved in an ineluctably advanc­
ing "microphysics of power" 198 that it is hopeless to resist. Fanon represents 
the interests of a double .constituency, native and Western, moving from 
confinement to liberation; ignoring the imperial context of his own theories, 
Foucault seems actually to represent an irresistible colonizing movement 
that paradoxically fortifies the prestige of both the lonely individual scholar 
and the system that contains him. Both. Fanon and Foucault have Hegel, 
Marx, Freud, Nietzsche, Canguihelm, and Sartre in their heritage, yet only 
Fanon presses that formidable arsenal into anti-authoritarian service. Fou­
cault, perhaps because of his disenchantment with both the insurrections of 
the r96os and the Iranian Revolution, swerves aw;iy from politics entirely. 199 
Much of Western Marxism, in its aesthetic and cultural departments, is 
similarly blinded to the matter of imperialism. Frankfurt School critical 
theory, despite its seminal insights into the relationships between domi­
nation, modern society, and the opportunities for redemption through art as 
critique, is stunningly silent on racist theory, anti-imperialist resistance, and 
oppositional practice in the empire. And lest that silence be interpreted as 
an oversight, we have today's leading Frankfurt theorist,Jiirgen Habermas, 
explaining in an interview (originally published in The New Left Review) that 
the silence is deliberate abstention: no, he says, we have nothing to say to 
"anti-imperialist and anti-capitalist struggles in th~ Third World," even if, 
he adds, "I am aware of the fact that this is a eurocentrically limited view."zoo 
All the major French theoreticians except Oeleuze, Todorov, and Oerrida 
have been similarly unheeding, which has not prevented their ateliers from 
churnin~ out theories of Marxism, language, psychoanalysis, and .history 
with an implied applicability to the whole world. Much the same thing can 
be said of most Anglo-Saxon cultural theory, with the important exception 
of feminism, and a small handful of work by young critics influence~ by 
Raymond Williams and Stuart Hall. 
So if European theory and Western Marxism as cultural co-efficients of 
liberation haven't in the main proved themselves to be reliable allies i.n the 
resistance to imperialism-on the contrary, one may suspect that they are 
part of the same invidious "universalism" that connected cultu,re with impe­
rialism for centuries-how has the liberationist anti-imperialism tried to Collaboration, Independence, and Liberation 
break this shackling unity? First, by a new integrative or contrapuntal 
orientation in history that. sees Western and. non-Western experiences as 
belonging together because they are connected by imperialism. Second, by 
an imaginative, even utopian vision which reconceives emancipatory (as 
opposed to confining) theory and performance. Third, by an investment 
neither in new authorities, doctrines, and encoded orthodoxies, nor in estab­
lished institutions and causes, but in a particular sort of nomadic, migratory, 
and anti-narrative energy. 
Let me illustrate my points by looking .at a wonderful passage in C.L.R. 
James's The BlackJacobins. Twenry-odd years after his book appeared in 1938, 
James appended a further chapter, "From ToussaintL'Ouverture to Fidel 
Castro." Although James is a highly original figure, as I said, it takes nothing 
away from his contribution to associate his.work with that of various metro­
politan historians and journalists-Basil Davidson, Thomas Hodgkin, Mal­
colm Caldwell among others in Britain, Maxime Rodinson, Jacques 
Chesnaux, Charles-Robert Argeron among others in France-who labored 
at the intersection of imperialism with culture, and who went the range from 
journalism to fiction to scholarship. That is, there was a conscious attempt 
not only to write history saturated in, taking maximum account of, the 
struggle between imperial Europe and· the peripheries, but to write it in 
terms both of subject matter and of treatment or method, from the stand­
point of and as part of the struggle against imperial domination. For all of 
them, the history of the Third World had to overcome the assumptions, 
attitudes, and values implicit in colonial narratives. If this meant, as it 
usually did, adopting a partisan position of advocacy, then so be it; it was 
impossible to write of liberation and nationalism, however allusively, with­
out also declaring oneself for or against them. They were correct, I believe, 
in presuming that in so globalizing a world-view as that of imperialism, there 
could be no neutrality: one either was on the side of empire or against it, and, 
since they themselves had lived the empire (as native or as white), there was 
no getting away from it. 
James's Black Jacobins treats the Santo Domingo slave uprising as a process 
unfolding within the same history as that of the French Revolution, and 
Napoleon and Toussaint are the two great figures who dominate those 
turbulent years. Events in France and in Haiti crisscross and r:efer to one 
another like voices in a fugue. James's narrative is broken up as a history 
dispersed in geography, in archival sources, in emphases both Black and 
French. Moreover James writes ofToussaint as someone who takes up the 
struggle for human freedom-a snuggle also going on in the metropolis to 
which culturally he owes his language and many of his moral allegiances-­
with a determination rare among subordinates, rarer still among slaves. He 280 RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
appropriates the principles of the Revolution not as a Black man but as a 
human, and he does so with a dense historical awareness of how in finding 
the language of Diderot, Rousseau, and Robespierre one follows predeces­
sors creatively, using the same words, employing inflections that trans­
formed rhetoric into actuality. 
Toussaint's life ended terribly, as a prisoner of Napoleon, confined in 
France. Yet the subject of james's book properly speaking is not contained 
. in Toussaint's biography any more than the history of the French Revolu­
tion would be adequately represented if the Haitian insurgency were left 
out. The process continues into the present--hence james's 1961 appendix, 
"from Toussaint to Castro" -and the predicament remains. How can a non­
or post-imperial history be written that is not naively utopian or hopelessly 
pessimistic, given the continuing embroiled actuality of domination in the 
Third World? This is a methodological and meta-historical aporia, and 
James's swift resolution of it is brilliantly imaginative. 
In digressing briefty to reinterpret Aime Cesaire's Cahier d'un retour au pays 
natal,) ames discovers the poet's movement through the deprivations of West 
Indian life, through "the blue steel rigidities" and "vainglorious conquests" 
of"the white world," to the West Indies again, where in wishing to be free 
from the hate he once felt toward his oppressors, the poet declares his 
commitment "to be the cultivator of this unique race." In other words, 
Cesaire finds that the ·continuation of imperialism means that there is some 
need to think of"man" (the exclusively masculine emphasis is quite striking) 
as something more than "a parasite in the world." "To keep in step with the 
world" is not the only obligation: 
but the work of man is only just beginning 
and it remains to man to conquer all 
the violence entrenched in the recesses of his passion. 
Atid no race possesses the monopoly of beauty, 
uf intelligence, uf force, and there 
is t¥ place for all at the rendezvous 
· uf victory. zoi (James's translation) 
This, says James, is the very center of Cesaire's poem, precisely as Cesaire 
discovers that the defensive assertion of one's identity, negritude, is not 
enough. Negritude is just one contribution to "the rendezvous of victory." 
"The vision of the poet," James adds, "is not economics or politics, it is 
poetic, sui generis, true unto itself and needing no other truth. But it would Collaboration, Independence, and Liberation 
be the most vulgar racism not to see here a poetic incarnation of Marx's 
famous sentence, 'The real history of humanity will begin.' "202 
At this moment James acco~plishes another contrapuntal, non-narrative 
turn. Instead of following Cesaire back to'West Indian or Third World 
history, instead of showing his immediate poetic, ideological, or political 
antecedents, James sets him next to his great Anglo-Saxon contemporary 
T. S. Eliot, whose conclusion is "Incarnation": 
Here the impossible union 
Of sphem of existence is actual, 
Here the past and the future 
Are conquered, and reconciled, 
Where action were otherwise movement 
Of that which is only moved 
And has in it no source of movement. 203 
By moving so unexpectedly from Cesaire to Eliot's "Dry Salvages," verses 
by a poet who, one might think, belongs to a totally different sphere,James 
rides the poetic force ofCesaire's "truth unto itself" as a vehicle for crossing 
over from the provincialism of one strand of history into an apprehension 
of other histories, all of them animated by and actualized in an "impossible 
union." This is a literal instance of Marx's stipulated beginning of human 
history, and it gives to his prose the dimension of a social community as 
actual as the history of a people, as general as the vision of the poet. 
~either an abstract, packaged theory, nor a disheartening collection of 
narratable facts, this moment in James's book embodies (and does not merely 
represent or deliver) the energies of anti-imperialist liberation. I doubt that 
anyone can take from it some repeatable doctrine, reusable theory, or 
memorable story, much less the bureaucracy of a future state. One might 
perhaps say that it is the history and politics of imperialism, of slavery, 
conquest, and domination freed by poetry, for a vision bearing on, if not 
delivering, true liberation. Insofar as it can be approximated in other begin­
nings then, like The Black Jacobins, it is a part of what in human history can 
move us from the hismry of domination toward the actuality of liberation. 
This movement resists the already charted and controlled narrative lanes 
and skirts the systems of theory, doctrine, and orthodoxy. But, as James's 
whole work attests, it does not abandon the social principles of community, 
critical vigilance, and theoretical orientation. And in contemporary Europe 
and the United States, such a movement, with its audacity and generosity 
of spirit, is particularly needed, as we advance into the twenty-first century. ·CHAPTER FOUR 
FREEDOM FROM 
DOMINATION IN THE 
FUTURE 
The new men of Empire are the ones who believe in (resh starts, new chapters, 
new pages; I struggle on with the old story, hoping that before ·it is finished it 
will reveal ro me why it was that I thought it worth the trouble. 
). M. Co!':TZEJ":, Wtliting for the Bflmariflnt 
( I ) 
American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 
I mperialism did not end, did not suddenly become "paSt," once decoloni­
zation had set in motion the dismantling of the classical empires. A legacy 
of connections still binds countries like Algeria and India to France and 
Britain respectively. A vast'new population of Muslims, Africans, and West 
Indians from former colonial territories now resides in metropolitan Europe; 
even Italy, Germany, and Scandinavia today must deal with these disloca­
tions, which are to a large degree the result of imperialism and decoloniza­
tion as -well as expanding European population. Also, the end of the Cold 
Wai: and of the Soviet Union has definitively changed the world map. The 
triumph of the United States as the last superpower suggests that a new set 
of force lines will structure the world, and they were already beginning to 
be apparent in the 196os and '7os. . 
Michael Barratt-Brown, in a preface to the 1970 second edition of his After 
Impirialirm (1963), argues "that imperialism is still without question a most 
powerful force in the economic, political and military relations by which the 
less economically developed lands are subjected to the more economically 
developed. We may still look forward to its ending."• It is ironic that American.Ascmdancy: The Public Space at War 283 
descriptions of the new furm ofimperialism have regularly employed idioms 
of gigantism and apocalypse that could not have as easily been applied to the 
classical empires. during their heyday. Some of these descriptions have an 
extraordinarily dispiriting inevitability, a kind of galloping, engulfing, im­
personal, and deterministic quality. Accumulation on a world scale; the 
world capitalist system; the development of underdevelopment; imperialism 
and dependency, or the structure of dependence; poverty and imperialism: 
the repertory is well-known in economics, political science, history, and 
sociology, and it has been identified less with the New World Order than 
with members of a controversial Left school of thought. Nevertheless the 
cultural implications of such phrases and concepts are discemible---:-despite 
their oft-debated and far from settled natu~and, alas, they are undeniably 
depressing to even the most untutored eye. 
What are the salient features of the re-presentation of me old imperial 
inequities, the persistence, in Arno Mayer's telling phrase, of the old re­
gime?2 One certainly is the immense economic ·rift between poor and rich 
states, whose basically quite simple topography was drawn in the starkest 
terms by the so-called Brandt Report, North-South: A Program for Suroival 
(198o). 3 Its conclusions are couched in me language of crisis and emergency: 
the poorest nations of the Southern Hemisphere must have meir "priority 
needs" addressed, hunger must be abolished, commodity earnings strength­
ened; manufacturing in the Northern Hemisphere should permit genuine 
growth in Southern manufacturing centers, trans-national corporations 
should be "restricted" in i:heir practices, the global monetary system should 
be reformed, development finance should be changed to eliminate what has 
b~en accurately described as "the debt trap." 4 The crux of the matter is, as 
the report's phrase has it, power-sharing, that is, giving the Southern coun­
tries a more equitable share in "power and decision-making within mone­
tary and financial institutions."S 
It is difficult to disagree with the report's diagnosis, which is made more 
credible by its balanced tone and its silent picture of the untrammelled 
rapacity, greed, and immorality of me North, or even with its recommenda­
tions. But how will the' changes come about? The post-war classifications of 
all the nations into three "worlds" --coined· by a French joul'nalist-has 
largely been abandoned. 6 Willy Brandt and his colleagues implicidy con­
cede that the United Nations, an admirable organization in principle, has not 
been adequate to the innumerable regional and global conflicts that occur 
with i_ncreasing frequency. With the exception of the work of small groups 
(e.g., the World Order Models Project), global thinking tends to reproduce 
the superpower, Cold War, regional, ideological, or ethnic contests of old, 
even more dangerous in me nuclear and .post-nuclear era, as the horrors of 2.84 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
Yugoslavia attest. The powerful are likely to get more powerful and richer, 
the weak less powerful and poorer; the gap between the two overrides the 
former distinctions between socialist and capitalist regimes that, in Europe 
at least, have become less significant. 
In 1981. Noam Chomsky concluded that during the 198os 
the "North-South" conflict will not subside, and new forms of domi­
nation will have to be devised to ensure that privileged segments of 
Western industrial society maintain substantial control over global 
resources, human and material, and benefit disproportionately fr<?m 
this control. Thus it comes as no surprise that the reconstitution of 
ideology in the United States finds echoes throughout the industrial 
world .... But it is an absolute requirement for the Western system of 
ideology that a vast gulf be established between the civilized West, with 
its traditional commitment to human dignity, liberty, and self-determi­
nation, and the barbaric brutality of those who for some reason­
perhaps defective genes--fail to appreciate the depth of this historic 
commitment, so well revealed by America's Asian wars, for example.' 
Chomsky's move from the North-South dilemma to American, and West­
ern, dominance is, I think, basically correct, although the decrease in Ameri­
can economic power; the urban, economic, and cultural crisis in the United 
States; the ascendancy of Pacific Rim states; and the confusions of a multi­
polar world have muted the stridency of the Reagan period. For one it 
underlines the continuity of the ideological need to consolidate and justify 
domination in cultural terms that has been the case in the West since the 
nineteenth century, and even earlier. Second, it accurately picks up the 
theme based on repeated projections and theorizations of American power, 
sounded ·in often very insecure and therefore overstated ways, that we live 
today in a period of American ascendancy. 
Studies during the past ·decade of major personalities of the mid­
twentieth century illustrate what I mean. Ronald Steel's Walter Lippmann and 
the American Century represents the mind-set of that ascendancy as inscribed 
in the career of the most famous American journalist-the one with the most 
prestige and power-of this century. The extraordinary thing about Lipp­
mann's career as it emerges from Steel's book is not that Lippmann was 
correct or especially perspicacious with regard to his reporting or his predic­
tions about world events (he was not), but rather that from an "insider's" 
position (the term is his) he articulated American global dominance without 
demurral, except for Viemam, and that he saw his role as pundit to be that 
of helping his compatriots to make "an adjustment to reality," the reality of American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War :z.8s 
unrivalled American power in the world, which he made more acceptable 
by stressing its moralism, realism, altruism with "a remarkable skill for not 
straying too far from the thrust of public opinion." 8 
A similar view, albeit differently expressed as a mandarin's more austere 
and elite understanding of the American global role, is found in George 
Kennan's influential writing. The author of the containment policy that 
guided United States official thinking for much of the Cold War period, 
Kennan believed his country to be the guardian ofWestern civilization. For 
him such a destiny in the non-European world implied no effort to be 
expended on making the United States popular ("rotarian idealism" he 
called it scornfully) but rather depended on "straight power cdncepts." And 
since no formerly colonized people or _state had the wherewithal to chal­
lenge the United States militarily or economically, he cautioned restraint. 
Yet in a memo written in 1941! for the Policy Planning Staff, he approved of 
recolonizing Africa and also, in something he wrote in 1971, of apartheid (not 
of its abuses however), al~hough he disapproved of the American interven­
tion in Vietnam and generally of "a purely American kind of informal 
imperial system." 9 There was no doubt in his mind that Europe and America 
were uniquely positioned to lead the world, a view that caused him to regard 
his own country as a sort of "adolescent'' growing into the role once played 
by the British empire. 
Other forces shaped post-war United States foreign policy besides men 
like Lippmann and Kennan-both lonely men alienated from the mass 
society they lived in, who hated jingoism and the cruder forms of aggressive 
American behavior. They knew that isolationism, interventionism, anti­
colonialism, free-trade imperialism were related to the domestic character­
istics of American political life described by Richard Hofstadter as 
"anti-intellectual" and ''paranoid": these produced the inconsistencies, ad­
vances, and retreats of United States foreign policy before the end of World 
War ·Two. Yet the idea of American leadership and exceptionalism is never 
absent; no matter what the United States does, these authorities often do not 
want it to be an imperial power like the others it followed, preferring instead 
the notion of "world responsibility" as a rationale for what it does. Earlier 
rationales-the Monroe Doctrine, Manifest Destiny, and so forth-lead to 
"world responsibility," which exactly corresponds to the growth in the 
United States' global interests after World War Two and to the conception 
of its enormous power as formulated by the foreign policy and intellectual 
elite .. 
In a persuasively clear account of what damage this has done, Richard 
Barnet notes that a United States military intervention in the Third World 
had occurred every year between 1945 and 1967 (when he stopped counting). 286 FREED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 MIN AT I 0 N IN T HE FUTURE 
Since that time, the United States has been impressively active, most notably 
during the Gulf War of 1991, when 65o,ooo troops were dispatched 6,ooo 
miles to turn back an Iraqi invasion of a United States ally. Such interven­
tions, Barnet says in The Roots of War, have "all the elements of a powerful 
imperial creed ... : a sense of mission, historical necessity, and evangelical 
fervor." He continues: 
The imperial creed rests on a theory of law;.making. According to the 
strident globalists, like [Lyndon Baines]Johnson, and the muted glo­
balists, like Nixon, the goal of U.S. foreign policy is to bring about a 
world increasingly subject to the rule oflaw. But it is the United States 
which must "organize the peace," to use Secretary of State Rusk's 
words. The United States imposes the "international interest" by set­
ting the ground rules for economic development and military deploy­
ment across the planet. Thus the United States sets rules for Soviet 
behavior in Cuba, Brazilian behavior in Brazil, Vietnamese behavior in 
Vietnam. Cold War policy is expressed by a series of directives on such 
extraterritorial matters as whether Britain may trade with Cuba or 
whether the government of British Guiana may have a Marxist dentist 
to run it. Cicero's definition of the early Roman empire was remarkably 
similar. It was the domain over which Rome enjoyed the legal right to 
enforce the law. Today America's self~ appointed writ runs throughout 
the world, including the Soviet Union and China, over whose territory 
the U.S. government has asserted the right to fiy military aircraft. The 
United States, uniquely blessed with surpassing riches and an excep­
tional history, stands above the international system, not within it. 
Supreme among nations, she stands ready to be the bearer of the Law.10 
Although these words were published in 1972., they even more accurately 
describe the United States during the invasion of Panama and the Gulf War, 
a country which continues to try to dictate its views about law and peace all 
over the world. The amazing thing about this is not that it is attempted, but 
that it is done with so much consensus and near unanimity in a public sphere 
constructed as a kind of cultural space expressly to represent and explain it. 
In periods of great internal crisis (e.g., a year or so after the Gu If War) this­
sort of moralistic triumphalism is suspended, put aside. Yet while it lasts the 
media play an extraordinary role in "manufacturing consent" as Chomsky 
calls it, in making the average American feel that it is up to "us" to right the 
wrongs of the world, and the devil with contradictions and inconsistencies. 
T~e Gulf intervention was preceded by a string of interventions (Panama, American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 287 
Grenada, Libya), all of them widely discussed, most of them approved, or 
at least undeterred, as belonging to "us" by right. As Kiernan puts it 
"America loved to think that whatever it wanted, was just what the human 
race wanted." 11 
For years the United States government has had an active policy of direct 
and announced intervention in the atfairs of Central and South America: 
Cuba, Nicaragua, Panama, Chile, Guatemala, Salvador, Grenada have had 
attacks made on their sovereignty ranging from outright war to coups and 
proclaimed subversion, from assassination attempts to the financing of"con­
tra" armies. In East Asia the United States fought two large wars, sponsored 
massive military drives that caused hundreds of thousands -of deaths at the 
hands of a "friendly" government (Indo-nesia in East Timor), overturned 
governments (Iran in 1953), and supported states in lawless activity, flouting 
United Nations resolutions, contravening stated policy (Turkey, Israel). The 
official line most of the time is that the United States is defending its 
interests, maintaining order, bringing justice to bear upon injustice and 
misbehavior. Yet, in the case of Iraq, the United States used the United 
Nations Security Council to push through resolutions for war, at the same 
time that in numerous other instances (Israel's chief among them) United 
Nations resolutions supported by the United States were unenforced or 
ignored, and the United States had unpaid dues to the United Nations of 
several hundred million dollars. , 
Dissenting literature has always survived in the United States alongside 
the authorized public space; this literature can be described as oppositional 
to the overall national and official performance. There are revisionist histori­
ans such as William Appleman Williams, Gabriel Kolko, and Howard Zinn, 
powerful public critics like Noam Chomsky, Richard Barnet, Richard Falk, 
and many others, all of them prominent not only as individual voices but as 
members of a fairly substantial alternative and anti-imperial current within 
the country. With them go such Left-liberal journals as The Nation, The 
Progressive, and, when its author was alive, l F. Stone's Weekry. How much of 
a following there is for such views as represented by the opposition is very 
difficult to say; there has always been an opposition-one thinks of anti­
imperialists like Mark Twain, William James, and Randolph Bourne--but 
the depressing truth is that its deterrent power has not been effective. Such 
views as opposed the United States attack on Iraq did nothing at all to stop, 
postpone, or lessen its horrendous force. What prevailed was an extraordi­
nary mainstream consensus in which the rhetoric of the government, the 
policymakers, the military, think tanks, media, and academic centers con­
verged on the necessity of United States force and the ultimate justice of its 288 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
projection, for which a long history of theorists and apologists from Andrew 
Jackson through Theodore Roosevelt to Henry Kissinger and Roben W. 
Tucker furnished the preparation. 
A correspondence is evident, but frequently disguised or forgotten, be­
tween the nineteenth-century doctrine of Manitest Destiny (the title of an 
1890 book by John Fiske), the territorial expansion of the United States, the 
enormous literature of justification (historical mission, moral regeneration, 
the expansion of freedom: all of these studied in Alben K. Weinberg's 
massively documented 1958 work Manifest Destiny), 12 and the ceaselessly 
repeated formulae about the need for an American intervention against this 
or that aggression since World War Two. The correspondence is rarely 
made explicit, and indeed disappears when the public drums of war are 
sounded and hundreds of thousands of tons of bombs are dropped on a 
distant and mostly unknown enemy. The intellectual blotting-out of what 
"we" do in the process interests me, since it is obvious that no imperial· 
mission or scheme can ever ultimately succeed in maintaining overseas 
control forever; history also teaches us that domination breeds resistance, 
and that the violence inherent in the imperial contest-for all its occasional 
profit or pleasure--is an impoverishment for both sides. These truths hold 
in an era saturated with the memory of past imperialisms. There are far too 
many politicized people on earth today for any nation readily to accept the 
finality of America's historical mission to lead the world. 
Enough work has been done by American cultural historians for us to 
understand the sources of the drive to domination on a world scale as well 
as the way that drive is represented and made acceptable. Richard Slotkin 
argues, in Regeneration Through Violence, that the shaping experience of Amer­
ican history was the extended wars with the native American Indians; this 
in turn produced an image of Americans not as plain killers (as D. H. 
Lawrence said of them) but as "a new race of people, independent of the 
sin-darkened heritage of man, seeking a totally new and original relationship 
to pure nature as hunters, explorers, pioneers and seekers." 13 Such imagery 
keeps recurring in nineteenth-century literature, most memorably in Mel­
ville's Moby-Dick, where, as C.L.R. James and V. G. Kiernan have argued 
from a non-American perspective, Captain Ahab is an allegorical represen­
tation of the American world quest; he is obsessed, compelling, unstoppable, 
completely wrapped up in his own rhetorical justification and his sense of 
cosmic symbolism.' 4 
No one would want to reduce Melville's great work to a mere literary 
decoration of events in the real world; besides, Melville himself was very 
critical of what Ahab was up to as an American. Yet the fact is that during 
the nineteenth century the United States did expand territorially, most often American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 289 
at the expense of native peoples, and in time came to gain hegemony over 
the North American continent and the territories and seas adjacent to it. 
Nineteenth-century offshore experiences ranged from the North African 
coast to the Philippines, China, Hawaii, and of course throughout the Carib­
bean and Central America. The broad tendency was to expand and extend 
control farther, and not to spend much time reflecting on the integrity and 
independence of Others, for whom the American presence was at very best 
a mixed blessing. 
An extraordinary, but nevertheless typical, example of American wilful­
ness is at hand in the relationship between Haiti and the United States. As 
J. Michael Dash reads it in Haiti and the United States: National Sternnype.r and 
the Literary Imagination, almost from the moment Haiti gained its indepen­
dence as a Black repul>lic in 18o3 Americans tended to imagine it as a void 
into which they could pour their own ideas. Abolitionists, says Dash, thought 
of Haiti not as a place with its own integrity and people but as a ~onvenient 
site for relocating freed slaves. Later the island and its people came to 
represent degeneracy and of course racial inferiority. The United State.~ 
occupied the island in 1915 (and Nicaragua in 1916) and set in place a native 
tyranny that exacerbated an already desperate state of affairs.'! And when in 
1991 and 199l thousands of Haitian refugees tried to gain entry into Florida, 
most were forcibly returned. 
Few Americans have agonized over places like Haiti or Iraq once the 
crisis or their country's actual intervention was over. Strangely, and despite 
both its intercontinental range and its genuinely various elements, American 
domination is insular. The foreign-policy elite has no long-standing tradi­
tion of direct rule overseas, as was the case with the British or the French, 
so American attention works in spurts; great masses of rhetoric and huge 
resources are lavished somewhere (Vietnam, Libya, Iraq, Panama), followed 
by virtual silence. Again Kiernan: "More multifarious than the British em­
pire, the new hegemony was even less capable of finding any coherent 
programme of action other than of bullheaded negation. Hence its readiness 
to let plans be made for it, by company directors or secret agents." 16 
Granted that American expansionism is principally economic, it is still 
highly dependent and moves together with, upon, cultural ideas and ideolo­
gies about America itself, ceaselessly reiterated in public. "An economic 
system," Kiernan rightly reminds us, "like a nation or a religion, lives not by 
bread alone, but by beliefs, visions, daydreams as well, and these may be no 
less vital to it for being erroneous." 17 There is a kind of monotony to the 
regularity of schemes, phrases, or theories produced by successive genera­
tions to justify the serious responsibilities of American global reach. Recent 
scholarship by Americans paints a bleak pieture of how most of these 2.90 FREEDOM FROM' DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
attitudes and the policies they gave rise to were based on almost petulant 
misinterpretations and ignorance, unrelieved except by a desire for mastery 
and domination, itself stamped by ideas of American exceptionalism. The 
relationship between America and its Pacific or Far Eastern interlocutors-­
China, Japan, Korea, Indochina-is informed by racial prejudice, sudden 
and relatively unprepared rushes of attention followed by enormous pres­
sure applied thousands of miles away, geographically and intellectually 
distant from the lives of most Americans. Taking into account the scholarly 
revelations. of Akiri Iriye, Masao Miyoshi,John Dower, and Marilyn Young, 
we see that there was a great deal of misunderstanding of the United States 
by these Asian countries, but, with.the complicated exception o[Japan, they 
did not actually penetrate the American continent. 
One can see this extraordinary asymmetry full blown with the emergence 
in the United States o{the discourse (and the policies) ofDevelopment and . . 
Modernization, an actuality treated in Graham Greene's novel The Q!!iet 
American, and with somewhat less comprehending skill in .Lederer and Bur­
dick's The Ugly American. A truly amazing conceptual arsenal-theories of 
economic phases, social types, traditional societies, systems transfers, 
pacification, social mobilization, and s() on-was deployed throughout the 
world; universities and think tanks received. huge government subsidies to 
pursue these ideas, many of which commanded the attention of strategic 
planners and policy experts in (or close to) the United States government. 
Not· until the great popular disquiet at the Vietnamese war did critical 
scholars pay attention.to this, but then, almost for the first time, the criticism 
was heard not just of United States policy in Indochina but of the imperialist 
premises of United States. attitudes to Asia. A persuasive account of the 
Development and Modernization discourse that takes advantage of the 
anti-war critique is Irene Gendzier's ;volume, Managing Political Ch~nge.l8 
She shows how the unexamined drive to global reach had the effect of 
depoliticizing, reducing, and sometimes even eliminating the integrity of 
overseas societies that seemed in need of modernizing and of what Walt 
Whitman Rostow called "economic take-off." 
Although these characterizations are not exhaustive, they do, I think, 
accurately describe a general policy with considerable social authority, 
which created what D.C.M. Pl~tt called in the British context a "departmen­
. tal view." The leading academic figures analyzed by Gendzier-Hunting­
ton, Pye, Verba, Lerner, Lasswell---determined the intellectual agenda and 
the perspectives of influential sectors of the government and academy. 
Subversion, radical nationalism, native arguments for independence: all 
these phenomena of decolonizatiort and the aftermath of classical imperial.:. 
ism were. seen within the guidelines provided by the Cold War. They had American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 2.91 
to be subverted or co-opted; in the case of Korea, China, Vietnam they 
required a renewed commitment to expensive military campaigns. The 
apparent challenge to American authority in the almost laughable case of 
post-Batista Cuba suggests that what was at stake was hardly security but 
rather a sense that within its self-defined domain (the hemisphere) the 
United States would not accept any infringements or sustained ideological 
challenges to what it considered to be "freedom." 
This twinning of power and legitimacy, one force obtaining in the world 
· of direct domination, the other in the cultural sphere, is a characteristic of 
classical imperial hegemony. Where it differs in the American century is the 
quantum leap in the reach of cultural authority, thanks in large measure to 
the unprecedented growth in the apparatus for the diffusion and control of 
information. As we shall see, the media are central to the domestic. culture. 
Wher~as a century ago European culture was associated with a white man's 
presence, indeed with his directly domineering (and hence resistible) physi­
cal presence, we now have in addition an. international media presence that 
insinuates itself, frequently at a level below conscious awareness, over a 
fantastically wide range. The phrase "cultural imperialism," made current 
and ·even fashionable by Jacques Lang, loses some of its meaning when 
applied to the presence of television serials like Dynarty and. Dallar in, say 
France or Japan, but becomes pertinent again when viewed in a global 
perspective. 
The closest thing to such a perspective was offered in the report published 
by the International Commission for the Study of Communication Problems 
convened at the behest of UNESCO and chaired by Sean McBride: Many 
Voicer, One World ( 1980 ), which addressed the so-called New. World Informa­
tion Order. 19 A great many often irrelevant words of angry ·analysis and 
attack have been heaped upon this report, most of them from Americ;an 
journalists and all-purpose sages who upbraid "the Communists" and "the 
Third World" for trying to curtail press democracy, the free flow of ideas, 
the market forces that shape telecommunications, the press and computer 
industries. But even the most cursory glance at the McBride Report will 
reveal that far from recommending simpleminded solutions like censorship, 
there was considerable doubt among most of the commission members that 
anything very much could be done to bring balance and equity in the 
anarchic world information order. Even not entirely sympathetic writers, for 
instance, Anthony Smith in The Geopoliticr of Information, concede the serious­
ness of the issues: 
The threat to independence in the late twentieth century from the new 
electronics could be greater than was colonialism itsel£ We are begin-192. FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
ning to learn that de-colonization and the growth of supra-nationalism 
were not the termination of imperial relationships but merely the 
extending of a geo-political web which has been spinning since the 
Renaissance. The new media have the power to penetrate more deeply 
into a "receiving" culmre than any previous manifestation of Western 
technology. The results could be immense havoc, an intensification of 
the social contradictions within developing societies today. 20 
No one has denied that the holder of greatest power in this configuration 
is the United States, whether because a handful of American trans-national 
corporations control the manufacture, distribution, and above all selection 
of news relied on by most of the world (even Sad dam Hussein seems to have 
relied on CNN for his news), or because the effectively unopposed expan­
sion of various forms ofculmral control that emanate from the United States 
has created a new mechanism of incorporation and dependence by which to 
subordinate and compel not only a domestic American constimency but also 
weaker and smaller cultures. Some of the work done by critical theorists--in 
particular, Herbert Marcuse's notion of one-dimensional society, Adorno 
and Enzensberger's consciousness industry-has clarified the namre of the 
mix of repression and tolerapce used as instruments of social pacification in 
Western societies (issues debated a generation ago by George Orwell, Al­
dous Huxley, and james Burnham); the influence of Western, and particu­
larly American media imperialism on the rest of the world reinforces the 
findings of the McBride Commission, as do also the highly important find­
ings by Herbert Schiller and Armand Mattelart about the ownership of the 
means of producing and circulating images, news, and representations. 11 
Yet before the media go abroad so to speak, they are effective in repre­
senting strange and threatening foreign culmres for the home audience, 
rarely with more success in creating an appetite for hostility and violence 
against these culmral "Others" than during the Gulf crisis and war of 
1990-91. Nineteenth-cenmry Britain and France used to send expeditionary 
forces to bomb natives--"it appears," Conrad's Marlow says as he gets to 
Africa, "that the French had one of their wars going on thereabouts .... In 
the empty immensity of earth, sky, and water, there she [a French man-of­
war] was, incomprehensible, firing into a continent. Pop, would go one of the 
six-inch guns"-now the United States does it. Consider now how the Gulf 
War was made acceptable: in mid-December 1990 a small-scale debate 
occurred on the pages of The Wall Street Journal and The New York Timer: 
Karen Elliott House of the former versus Anthony Lewis of the latter. 
House's thesis was that the United States should not wait for sanctions to· 
work, but ought to attack Iraq, making Saddam Hussein a clear loser. Lewis's American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 293 
rebuttal displayed his usual mea~re of reasonableness and liberal good faith, 
qualities that have distinguished him among prominent American colum­
nists. A supporter of George Bush's initial response to Iraq's invasion of 
Kuwait, Lewis now felt that the prospects of an early war were high, and 
ought to be resisted. He was impressed by the arguments of people like the 
super-hawk Paul Nitze, who had been saying that a large assortment of 
disasters would occur if an American ground offensive was undertaken in the 
Gulf. The United States should wait, increase economic and diplomatic 
pressure, then the case for a much later war might be plausible. A couple of 
weeks later the two antagonists appeared on the MacNeil/ Lehrer NewsHour, 
a nightly national program that permits lengthy discussion and analysis, to 
dramatize their earlier positions. To watch the debate was to see opposed 
philosophies engaged in earnest discussion at a sensitive moment in the 
national experience. The United States seemed poised for war: here were 
the pros and cons. eloquently put within the sanctioned public space, a 
national nightly news program. 
As realists both House and Lewis accepted the principle that "we"-this 
pronoun, almost more than any other word, fortifies the somewhat illusory 
sense that all Americans, as co-owners of the public space, participate in the 
decisions to commit America to its far-flung foreign interventions---ought 
to be in the Gulf, regulating the behavior of states, armies, and peoples several 
thousand miles away. National survival was not an issue and never came up. 
But there was much talk of principles, morality, and right; both spoke of 
military force as something more or less at their disposal, to deploy, use, and 
:withdraw appropriarely, and in all this the United Nations seemed at best 
an extension of United States policy. This particular debate was depressing 
because both antagonists were considerable people, neither predictable 
hawks (like Henry Kissinger, who never tired of "surgical strikes") nor 
national security experts (like Zbigniew Brzezinski, who energetically op­
posed the war on solidly geo-political grounds). 
For both House and Lewis,_ "our" actions were part of the assumed 
heritage of American actions in the world at large, where America has 
intervened for two centuries with often devastating, but routinely forgotten, 
results. Rarely in the debate was there mention of the Arabs as having 
something to do with the war, as its victims, for instance, or (equally 
convincingly) its instigators. One had the impression that the crisis was 
entirely to be dealt with in petto, as an internal issue for Americans. The 
impending conflagration, with its unconcealed and certain likelihood of 
terrible destruction, was distant, and once again, except for the (very few) 
arriving body bags and bereaved families, Americans were largely spared. 
The abstract quality imparted coldness and cruelty to the situation. 294 FREED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 MIN AT I 0 N IN T HE F U T U R E 
As an American and Arab who lived in both worlds, I found all this 
particularly troubling, not least because the confrontation appeared so total, 
so globally all-encompassing; there was no way of not being involved. Never 
had nouns designating the Arab world or its components been so bandied 
about; never had they had so strangely abstract and diminished a meaning, 
and rarely did any regard or care accompany them, even though the United 
States was not at war with all the Arabs. The Arab world compelled fascina­
tion and interest and yet withheld affection or enthusiastic and particular 
knowledge .. No major cultural group, for: example, was (and still is) as little 
known: if one were to ask an American au coumnt with recent fiction or 
poetry for the name of an Arab writer, probably the only one to come up 
would still be Kahlil Gibran. How could there be so much interaction on one 
level, and so little actuality on the other? 
From the Arab point of view, the picture is just as skewed There is still 
hardly any literature in Arabic that portrays Americans; the most interesting 
exception is Abdelrahman el Munif's massive series of novels Cities ofSalt,zz 
but his books are banned in several countries; and his native Saudi Arabia 
~as stripped him of his citizenship. To my knowledge there is still no 
institute or major academic department in the Arab world whose main 
purpose is the study of America, although the United States is by far the 
largest, most significant outside force in the contemporary Arab world Some 
Arab leaders who spend their lives denouncing American interests also 
expend considerable energies getting their children into American universi­
ties and arranging for green cards. It is still difficult to explain even to 
well-educated and experienced fellow Arabs that United States foreign 
policy is not in fact run by the CIA, or a conspiracy, or a shadowy network 
of key "contacts"; nearly everyone that I know believes the United States 
plans virtually every event of significance in the Middle East including even, 
in a mind-boggling suggestion made to me once, the Palestinian intifoda. 
This fairly stable mix oflong familiarity (well described in James Field's 
America and the Mediterranean Worlt.l)/ 3 hostility, and ignorance pertains on 
both sides of a complex, uneven, and relatively recent cultural encounter. 
The overriding sense one had at the time of Operation Desert Storm was 
inevitability, .as if President Bush's declared need "to get down there" and 
(in his own sporty argot) "kick ass'' had to run up against Saddam Hussein's 
sternly brutal expression of the post-colonial Arab need to confront, talk 
back to, stand unblinkingly before the United States. The public rhetoric, in 
other words, was undeterred, uncomplicated by considerations of detail, 
realism, cause or effect. For at least a decade movies about American com­
mandos pitted a hulking Rambo or technically whiz-like Delta Force against American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 2.95 
Arab/Muslim terrorist-desperadoes; in 1991 it was as if an almost metaphysi­
cal intention to rout Iraq had sprung into being, not because Iraq's offense, 
though great, was cataclysmic, but because a small non-white country had 
disturbed or rankled a suddenly energized super-nation imbued with a 
fervor that could only be satisfied with compliance or subservience from 
"sheikhs," dictators, and camel-jockeys. The truly acceptable Arabs would 
be those who like Anwar Sad at seemed purified almost completely of their 
bothersome national selthood and might become folksy talk-show guests. 
Historically the American, and perhaps generally the Western, media 
have been sensory extensions of the main cultural context. ·Arabs are only 
an attenuated recent example of Others who have incurred the wrath of a 
stern White Man, a kind of Puritan superego whose errand into the wilder­
ness knows few boundaries and who will go to great lengths indeed to make 
his points. Yet of course the word "imperialism" was a conspicuously missing 
ingredient in American discussions about the Gul£ "In the United States," 
according to historian Richard W. Van Alstyne in The RisingAmtrican Empire, 
"it is almost heresy to describe the nation as an empire." 24 Yet he shows that 
the early founders of the Republic, including George Washington, charac­
terized the country as an empire, with a subsequent foreign policy that 
· renounced revolution and promoted imperial growth. He quotes one states­
man after another arguing, as Reinhold Niebuhr put it caustically, that the 
country was "God's American Israel," whose "mission" was to be "trustee 
under God of the civilization of the world." It was therefore difficult not to 
hear echoes of that same grandiose self-endowment at the time of the Gulf 
War. And as the Iraqi infraction seemed actually to grow before the collec­
tive eyes of the nation, Saddam becaine Hitler, the butcher of Baghdad, the 
madman (as described by Senator Alan Simpson) who was to be brought low. 
Anyone who·has read Moby-Dick may have found it irresistible to extrapo­
late from that great novel to the real world, to see the American empire 
preparing once again, like Ahab, to take after an imputed evil. First comes 
the unexamined moral mission, then, in the media, its military-geo-s(rategic 
extension. The most disheartening thing about the media-aside from their 
. sheepishly following the government policy mode~ mobilizing for war right 
from the start:_was their trafficking in "expert" Middle East lore, sup­
posedly well-informed about Arabs. All roads lead to the bazaar; Arabs only 
understand force; brutality and violence are part of Arab civilization; Islam 
is an intolerant, segregationist, "medieval," fanatic, cruel, anti-woman reli­
gion. The context, framework, setting of any discussion was limited, indeed 
frozen, by these ideas. There seemed considerable but inexplicable enjoy­
ment to be had in the prospect that at last "the Arabs" as represented by 296 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
Saddam were going to get their comeuppance. Many scores would be settled 
against various old enemies of the West Palestinians, Arab nationalism, 
Islamic civilization. 
What got left out was enormous. Litde was reported on oil company 
profits, or how the surge in oil prices had little to do with supply; oil 
continued to be overproduced. The Iraqi case against Kuwait, or even the 
nature of Kuwait itself-liberal in some ways, illiberal in others-received 
next to no hearing. Little was said or analyzed about the complicity and 
hypocrisy of the Gulf states, the United States, Europe, and Iraq together 
during the Iran-Iraq War. Opinion on such issues circulated well after the 
war, for example, in an essay by Theodore Draper in Th.e NI!'W York Review 
of Books (January 16, 1991), which suggested that some acknowledgement of 
Iraq's claim against Kuwait might have staved off a war. There werr efforts 
made by a small handful of scholars to analyze the popular rallying of some 
Arabs to Saddam, despite the unattractiveness of his rule, but these efforts 
were not integrated into, or allowed equal time with the peculiar inflections 
of American policy, which for a time promoted Saddam, then demonized 
him, then learned how to live with him all over again. 
It is curious and profoundly symptomatic of the Gulf conflict that one 
word that was tediously pronounced and repronounced and yet left unan­
alyzed was "linkage," an ugly solecism that seems to have been invented as 
a symbol of the unexamined American right to ignore or include whole 
geographical sections of the globe in its considerations. During the Gulf 
crisis, "linkage" meant not that there was, but that th~re was no connection 
between things that in fact belonged together by common association, sense, 
geography, history. These were sundered, left apart for convenience's sake 
and for the benefit of imperious United States policymakers, military strate­
gists, and area experts. Every one his own carver, said Jonathan Swift. That 
th.e Middle East was linked internally by all sorts ofties-thatwas irrelevant. 
That Arabs might see a connection between Saddam in Kuwait and, say, 
Turkey in Cyprus-that too was pointless. That United States policy itself 
was a link!lge was a forbidden topic, most of all for pundits whose role was 
to manage popular consent for a war though it never actually emerged. 
The entire premise was colonial: that a small Third World dictatorship, 
nurtured and supported by the West, did not have the right to challenge 
America, which was white and superior. Britain h?mbed Iraqi troops in the 
191os for daring to resist colonial rule; seventy years later the United States 
did it but with a more moralistic tone, which did little to conceal the thesis 
that Middle East oil reserves were an American trust. Such practices are 
anachronistic and supremely mischievous, since they not only make wars American Ascendancy: The PubliC Space at War 2.97 
continuously possible and attractive, but also prevent a secure knowledge of 
history, diplomacy, and politics from having the importance it should. 
An article that appeared in the Winter I99<>-9I issue of Foreign Affairs, 
entitled "The Summer of Arab Discontent," opens with the following pas­
sage, which perfectly encapsulates the sorry state of knowledge and power 
that gave rise to Operation Desert Storm: 
No sooner had the Arab/Muslim world said farewell to the wrath and 
passion of the AyatOllah Khomeini's crusade than ariother contender 
rose in Baghdad. The new claimant was made of material different from 
the turbaned saviour from Qpm: Saddam Hussein was not a writer of 
treatises in Islamic government nor a product of high learning in 
religious seminaries. Not for him were the drawn-out ideological strug­
gles for the hearts and minds of the faithful. He came from a brittle 
land, a frontier country between Persia and Arabia, with little claim to 
culture and books and grand ideas. The new contender was a despot, 
a ruthless and skilled warden who had tamed his domain and turned it 
into a large prison. 25 
Yet even schoolchildren know that Iraq was the seat of Abbasid civilization, 
the highest flowering of Arab culture between the ninth and twelfth centu­
ries, which produced works of literature still read today as Shakespeare, 
Dante, and Dickens are still read, and that, ~sa capital city, Baghdad is also 
one of the great monuments of Islamic art. 26 In addition, it is where, along 
~with Cairo and Damascus, the nineteenth- and twentieth-century revivai·of 
Arab art and literature took place. Baghdad produced at least five of the 
greatest twentieth-century Arab poets and without any question most of its 
leading artists, architects, and sculptors. Even though Saddam was a Taknll, 
to imply that Iraq and its citizens had no relation to books and ideas is to 
be amnesiac about Sumer, Babylon, Nineveh, Hammurabi, Assyria, and all 
the great monuments of ancient Mesopotamian (and world) civilization, 
whose cradle Iraq is. To say in so unqualified a way that Iraq was a "brittle" 
land, with the suggestion of overall aridity and emptiness, is also to show an 
ignorance that an elementary schoolchild would be embarrassed to reveal. 
What happened to the verdant valleys of the Tigris and the Euphrates? 
What happened to the ancient truth that, of all the countries in the Middle 
East, Iraq has been by far the most fertile? 
The author sings the praises of contemporary Saudi Arabia, more brittle 
and out of touch with books, ideas, and culture than Iraq ever was. My point 
is not to belittle Saudi Arabia, which is an important country and has much 2.98 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
to contribute. But such writing as this is symptomatic of the intellectual will 
to please power in public, to tell it what it wants to hear, to say to it that it 
could go ahead and kill, bomb, and destroy, since what would be being 
attacked was really negligible, brittle, with no relationship to ·books, ideas, 
cultures, and no relation either, it gently suggests, to real people. With such 
information about Iraq, what forgiveness, what humanity, what chance for 
humane argument? Very little, alas. Hence the rather sodden and uneu­
phoric commemoration of Operation Desert Storm a year after it; with .even 
right-wing columnists and intellectuals bewailing President Bush's "imperial 
presidency" and the inconclusiveness of a war that merely prolonged the 
country's many crises. 
The world cannot long afford so heady a mixture of patriotism, relative 
solipsism, social authority, unchecked aggressiveness, and defensiveness to­
ward others. Today the United States is triumphalist internationally, and 
seems in a febrile way eager to prove that it is number one, perhaps to offset 
the recession, the endemic problems posed by the cities, poverty, health, 
education, production, and the Euro-Japanese challenge. Although an 
American, I grew up in a cultural framework suffused with the idea that Arab 
nationalism was all-important, also that it was an aggrieved and unfulfilled 
nationalism, beset with conspiracies, enemies both internal and external, 
obstacles to overcome for which no price was too high. 
My Arab environment had been largely colonial, but as I was growing up 
you could travel overland from Lebanon and Syria through Palestine to 
Egypt and points west. Today that is impossible. Each country places formi­
dable obstacles at the borders. (And for Palestinians, crossing is an especially 
horrible experience, since often the countries who support Palestine loudly 
treat actual Palestinians the worst.) Arab nationalism has not died, but has 
all too often resolved itself into smaller and smaller units. Here too linkage 
comes last in the Arab setting. The past wasn't better, but it was more 
healthily interlinked, so to speak; people were actually connected to one 
another, rather than staring at one another over .fortified frontiers. In many 
schools you would encounter Arabs from everywhere, Muslims and Ch.ris­
tians, plus Armenians, Jews, Greeks, Italians, Indians, Iranians, all mixed up, 
all under one or another colonial regime, but interacting as if it were natural 
to do so. Today state nationalisms ·fracture into clan or sectarian ones. 
Lebanon and Israel are perfect examples of what has happened: the desir­
ability of rigid cantonization in one form or another is present nearly 
everywhere as a group feeling if not practice, and is subsidized by the state, 
with its bureaucracies and secret polices. Rulers are clans, families, 'cliques, 
closed circles of aging oligarchs, almost mythologically immune, like Garda 
Marquez's autumnal patriarch, to new blood or change. American Ascendancy: The Public Space at War 299 
The effort to homogenize and isolate populations in the name of. national­
ism (not liberation) has led to colossal sacrifices and failures. In most parts 
of the Arab world, civil society (universities, the media, and culture broadly 
speaking) has been swallowed up by political society, whose main form is the 
state. One of the great achievements of the early post-war Arab nationalist 
governments was mass literacy: in Egypt the results were dramatically 
beneficial almost beyond imagining. Yet the mixture of accelerated literacy 
and tub-thumping ideology exactly bears out Fanon's fears. My impression 
is that more effort is spent in sustaining the connection, bolstering the idea 
that to be Syrian, Iraqi, Egyptian, or Saudi is a sufficient end, rather than in 
thinking critically, even audaciously, about the national program itself. 
Identity, always identity, over and above knowing about others. 
In this lopsided state of affairs, militarism gained far too many privileges 
in the Arab world's moral economy. Much of the reason has to do with the 
sense of being unjustly treated, for which Palestine was not only a metaphor 
but a reality. But was the only answer military force, huge armies, brassy 
slogans, bloody promises, and, along with that, endless concrete instances of 
militarism, starting with catastrophically lost wars at the top and working 
down to physical punishment and menacing gestures at the bonom? I do not 
know a single Arab who would demur in private, or who would not readily 
agree that the state's monopoly on coercion has almost completely elimi­
nated democracy in the Arab world, introduced immense hostility between 
rulers and ruled, placed much too high value on conformity, opportunism, 
.flattery, and· getting along rather than on risking new ideas, criticism, or 
dissent. 
Taken far enough this produces exterminism, the notion that if you do not 
get your way or something displeases you it is possible simply to blot it out 
That notion. was surely in some way behind Iraq's aggression against Kuwait. 
What sort of muddled and anachronistic idea of Bismarckian "integration" 
was it to wipe out a country and smash its society with "Arab unity" as the 
goal? The most disheartening thing was that so many people, many of them 
victims of the same brutal logic, appear to have supported the action and 
sympathized not at all with Kuwait. Even if one grants that Kuwaitis were 
unpopular (does one have to be popular not to be exterminated?) and even 
if Iraq claimed to champion Palestine in standing up to Israel and the United 
States, surely the ·very idea that a nation should be obliterated along the way 
is a murderous proposition, unfit for a great civilization. It is a measure of 
the dreadful state of political culture in the Arab world today that such 
extenninism is current. 
Oi~ however much it may have brought development and prosperity-it 
did-where it was associated with violence, ideological.reiinement, political 300 FREEDOM FROM D.OMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
defensiveness, and cultural dependency on the United States created more 
rifts and social problems than it healed. For anyone who thinks of the Arab 
world as possessing a plausible sort of internal cohesion, the general air of 
mediocrity and corruption that hangs over this region that is limitlessly 
wealthy, superbly endowed culturally and historically, and amply blessed 
with gifted individuals is an immense puzzle and of course disappointment. 
Democracy in any real sense of the word is nowhere to be found in the 
still "nationalistic" Middle East: there are either privileged oligarchies or 
privileged ethnic groups. The large mass of people is crushed beneath 
dictatorship or unyieJding, unresponsive, unpopular government. But the 
notion that the United States is a virtuous innocent in this dreadful state of 
affairs is unacceptable, as is the proposition that the Gulf War was not a war 
between George Bush and Saddam Hussein-it most certainly was-and 
that the United States acted solely and principally in the interests of the 
United Nations. At bottom it was a personalized struggle between, on the 
one hand, a Third World dictator of the kind that the United States has long 
dealt with (Haile Selassie, Somoza, Syngman Rhee, the Shah oflran, Pino­
chet, Marcos, Noriega, etc.), whose rule it encouraged, whose favors it long 
enjoyed, and, oil the other, the president of a country which has taken on 
the mantle of empire inherited from Britain and France and was determined 
to remain in the Middle East for its oil and for reasons of goo-strategic and 
political advantage. 
For two generations the United States has sided in the Middle East mostly 
with tyranny and injustice. No struggle for democracy, or women's rights, 
or secularism and the rights of minorities has the United States officially 
supported. Instead one administration after .another has propped up compli­
ant and unpopular clients, and turned away from the efforts of small peoples 
to liberatt; themselves from military occupation, while subsidizing their 
enemies. The United States has prompted unlimited militarism and (along 
with France, Britain, China, Germany, and others) engaged in vast arms 
sales everywhere in the region, mostly to governments which were driven 
to more and more extreme positions as a result of the United States' obses­
sion with, and exaggeration of the power of Saddam Hussein. To conceive 
of a post-war Arab world dominated by the rulers of Egypt, Saudi Arabia, 
and Syria, all of them working in a new Pax Americana as part of the New 
World Order is neither intellectually nor morally credible. 
There has not yet developed a discourse in the American public space 
that does anything more than identify with power, despite the dangers of 
that power in a world which has shrunk so small and has become so 
impressively interconnected. The United States cannot belligerently pre­
sume the right, with 6 percent of the world's population, to consume 30 American Arcendancy: The Public Space at War 301 
percent of the world's energy, for example. But that is not all. For decades 
in America there has been a cultural war against the Arabs and Islam: 
appalling racist caricatures of Arabs and Muslims suggest that they are all 
either terrorists or sheikhs, and that the region is a large arid slum, fit only 
for profit or war. The very notion that there might be a history, a culture, 
a society-indeed many societies-has not held the stage for more than a 
moment or two, not even during the chorus of voices proclaiming the virtues 
of "multiculturalism." A dow of trivial instant books by journalists tlooded 
the market and gained currency for a handful of dehumanizing stereotypes; 
all of them rendering the Arabs essentially as one or another variant of 
Saddam. As to the unfortunate Kurdish and Shi'ite insurgents, who were 
first encouraged by the United States to rise up against Saddam, then aban­
doned to his merciless revenge, they are scarcely remembered, much less 
mentioned. 
After the sudden disappearance of Ambassador April Glaspie, who had 
long experience in the Middle East, the American administration had hardly 
any highly placed professional with any real knowledge or experience of the 
Middle East, its languages or its peoples. And after the systematic attack on 
its civilian infrastructure, Iraq is still being destroyed-by starvation, dis­
ease, and desperation-not because of its aggression against Kuwait,· but 
because the United States wants a physical presence in the Gulf and an 
excuse to be there, wants to have direct leverage on oil to affect Europe and 
Japan, because it wishes to set the world agenda, because Iraq is still per­
ceived as a threat to Israel. 
Loyalty and patriotism should be based on a critical sense of what the facts 
are, and what, as residents of this shrinking and depleted planet, Americans 
owe their neighbors and the rest of ma.nkind. Uncritical solidarity with the 
policy of the moment, especially when it is so unimaginably costly, cannot 
be allowed to rule. 
Desert Storm was ultimately an imperial war against the Iraqi people, an 
effort to break and kill them as part of an effort· to break and kill Saddam 
Hussein. Yet this anachronistic and singularly bloody aspect was largely kept 
from the American television audience, as a way of maintaining its image as 
a painless Nintendo hercise, and the image of Americans as virtuous, clean 
warriors. It might have made a difference even to Americans who are not 
normally interested in history to know that the last time Baghdad was 
destroyed was in 1258 by the Mongols, although the British furnish a more 
recent precedent for violent behavior against Arabs. 
The absence of any significant domestic deterrent to this extraordinary 
example of an almost unimaginable collective violence unleashed by the 
United States against a distant non-white enemy is illuminated when we 302 F REED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 MIN AT I 0 N IN THE FUTURE 
read Kiernan's account of why American intellectuals except for individuals 
and groups, as opposed to "enough numbers to give them [the criticisms] 
practical weight," were so uncritical of the country's behavior during the 
197os. Kiernan concedes that "the country's longstanding pride in it$elf as a 
new civilization" was real, but that it "lent itself perilously to perversion by 
demagogues" was also real. There was a danger that that sense of self-pride 
was becoming too much like Bismarckian Kultur, "with 'culture' hardening 
into technological 'know-how.' "In addition, and "like Britain's fom1er sense 
of superiority, that of Americans was buttressed by. a high degree of insula­
tion from and ignorance of the rest of the world." Finally: 
This remoteness has helped to give the American intelligentsia in 
modern times an analogous remoteness from life, or historical reality. 
It was not easy for dissidents to break the barrier. There was a certain 
. shallowness, a failure to rise much above the level of journalism, in the 
literature of protest in the inter-war years .... It lacked the imaginative 
depth or resonance which can only be derived from a responsive 
environment .... From the World War onward, intellectuals were 
drawn increasingly into public activities whose ultimate dynamo was 
the military-industrial complex. They took part in strategic planning, 
and the development of scientific warfare and counter-insurgency, 
were flatteringly invited to the White House, and rewarded presidents 
with the incense due to royalty. All through the Cold War, scholars 
engaged in Latin American studies, underwrote the ideology of "good 
neighborship," of the harmony of interests between the U.S. and the 
rest of the world. Chomsky had good reason to speak of the "over­
whelming urgency" of the need to counteract "the effects of a genera­
tion ofindoctrination and a long history of self-adulation"; he appealed 
to intellectuals to open their eyes to the "tradition of naivete and 
self-righteousness that disfigures our intellectual history."z' 
This applies with great force to the GulfWar of1991. Americans watched 
the war on television with a relatively unquestioned certainty that they were 
seeing the reality, whereas what they saw was the most covered and the least 
reported war in history. The images and the prints were controlled by the 
government, and the major American media copied one another, and were 
in turn copied or shown (like CNN) all over the world. Hardly any attention 
to speak of was paid to the damage done to the enemy at the same time that 
some intellectuals were silent and felt helpless, or contributed to the "pub­
lic" discussion in terms that were accommodated uncritically to the imperial 
desire to go to war. Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
So pervasive has the professionalization of intellectual life become that 
the sense of vocation, as Julien Benda described it for the intellectual, has 
been almost swallowed up. Policy-oriented intellectuals have internalized 
the norms of the state, which when it understandably calls them to the 
capital, in effect becomes their patron. The critical sense is often conve-:­
niencly jettisoned. As for intellectuals whose charge includes values and 
pJ,"inciples-literary, philosophical, historical specialists--the American uni­
versity, with its munificepce, utopian sanctuary, and remarkable diversity, 
has defanged them. Jargons of an almost unimaginable rebarbativeness dom­
inate their styles. Cults like post-modernism, discourse analysis, New His­
toricism, deconstruction, neo~pragmatism transport them into the country of 
the blue; an astonishing sense of weightlessness with regard ro the gravity 
of history and individual responsibility fritters away attention to public 
matters, and to public discourse. The result is a kind of doundering about 
that is ·most dispiriting to witness, even as the society as a whole. drifts 
without direction or coherence. Racism, poverty, ecological ravages, disease, 
and an appallingly widespread ignorance: these are left to the media and the 
odd political candidate during an election campaign. 
( II ) 
Challenging Orthodoxy and Authon'ty 
N ot that we have wanted for extremely loud reminders of Chomsky's 
"reconstitution of ideology," whose· elements include notions about 
Western Judeo-Chr;istian triumphalism, the inherent backwardness of the 
non-Western world, the dangers of various foreign creeds, the proliferation 
of "anti-democratic" conspiracies, the celebration and recuperation of 
canonical works, authors, and ideas. Inversely, other cultures are more and 
more looked at through the perspectives of pathology andjor therapy. 
However accurate a'nd serious as scholarship, redecrion, and analysis, books 
appearing in London, Paris, or New York with rides like The African Condi~ 
tion or The Arab Predicament or The Republic of Fear or The Latin American 
Syndrome are consumed in what Kenneth Burke calls "frameworks of accep­
tance" whose conditions are quite peculiar. 
On the one hand, no one in the dominant public space had paid much 
attention to Iraq as society, culture, or history until August '99'i then the 
outpouring of quick-fix books and television programs could hardly be 304 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
stopped. Typically The Republic ofFea,. appeared in 1!)89, unnoticed. Its author 
later became a celebrity not because his book makes a scholarly contribu­
tion--he does not pretend otherwise-but because its obsessive and mono­
chromatic "portrait" of Iraq perfectly ·suits the need for dehumanized, 
ahistorical, and demonological representation of a country as the embodi­
ment of an Arab Hitler. To be non-Western (the reifying labels are them­
selves symptomatic) is ontologically thus to be unforrunate in nearly every 
way, before the facts, to be at worst a maniac, and at best a follower, a lazy 
consumer who, as Naipaul says somewhere, can use but could never have 
invented the telephone. 
On the other hand, the demystification of all cultural constructs, "ours" 
as well as "theirs," is a new fact that scholars, critics, and artists have put 
before us. We cannot speak of history today without, for instance, making 
room in our statements about it for Hayden White's theses in Mdahistory, 
that all historical writing'is writing and delivers figural language and repre­
sentational tropes, be they in the codes of metonymy, metaphor, allegory, or 
irony. From the work of Lukacs, Fredric Jameson, Foucault, Derrida, Same, 
Adorno, and Benjamin-to mention only some of the obvious names-we 
have a vivid apprehension of the processes of regulation and force by which 
cultural hegemony reproduces itself, pressing even poetry and spirit into 
administration and the commodity form. 
Yet, in the main, the breach between these consequential metropolitan 
theorists and either the ongoing or the historical imperial experience is truly 
vast. The contributions of empire to the arts of observation, description, 
disciplinary formation, and theoretical discourse have been ignored; and 
with fastidious discretion, perhaps squeamishness, these new theoretical 
discoveries have routinely bypassed the confluences between their findings 
and the liberationist energies released by resistance cultures in the Third 
World. Very rarely do we encounter direct applications from one realm to 
the other, as we do when, for a lonely example, Arnold Krupat turns the 
resources of post-structuralist theory on thlu sad panorama produced by 
genocide and cultural amnesia which is beginning to be known as "native 
American literature," in order to interpret the configurations of power and 
authentic experience contained in its texts.28 
We can and indeed must speculate as to why there has been a practice of 
self-confinement of the libertarian theoretical capital produt:ed in the West, 
and why at the same time, in the formerly colonial world, the prospect for 
a culture with strongly liberationist components has rarely seemed dimmer. 
Let me give an example. Asked in 1985 by a national university in one of 
the Persian Gulf States to visit there for a week, I found that my mission was 
to evaluate its English program and perhaps offer some recommendations for Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
its improvement. I was flabbergasted to discover that in sheer numerical 
tenps English attracted the largest number of young people of any depan­
ment in the university, but disheanened to find that the curriculum was 
divided about equally between what was called linguistics (that is, grammar 
and phonetic structure) and literature. The literary courses were, I thought, 
rigorously onhodox, a pattern followed even in older. and more distin­
guished Arab universities like those ofCajro and Ain Shams. Young Arabs 
dutifully read Milton, Shakespeare, Wordsworth, Austen, and Dickens as 
they might have studied Sanskrit or medieval heraldry; no emphasis was 
placed on the relationship between English and the colonial processes that 
brought the language and its literature to the Arab world. I could not detect 
much interest, except in private discussions with a few faculty members, in 
the new English-language literatures of the Caribbean, Africa, or Asia It was 
an anachronistic and odd confluence of rote learning, uncritical teaching, 
and (to put it kindly) haphazard results. 
Still, I learned two facts that interested me as a secular intellectual and 
critic. The reason for the large numbers of students taking English was given 
frankly by a somewhat disaffected instructor: many of the students proposed 
to end up working for airlines, or banks, in which English was the world­
wide lingua franca. This all but terminally consigned English to the level of 
a technical language stripped of expressive and aesthetic characteristics and 
denuded of any critical or self-conscious dimension. You learned English to 
use computers, respond to orders, transmit telexes, decipher manifests, and 
so fonh. That was all. The other thing I discovered, to my alarm,. was that 
English such as it was existed in what seemed to be a seething caldron of 
-·Islamic revivalism. Everywhere I turned, Islamic slogans relating to elec­
tions for the university senate were plastered all over the wall (I later found 
out that the various Islamic candidates won a handsome, if not crushing, 
plurality). In Egypt, in 1989, after having lectured to the English Faculty of 
Cairo University for an hour about nationalism, independence, and libera­
tion as alternative cultural practices to imperialism, I was asked about "the 
theocratic alternative." I had mistakenly supposed the questioner was asking 
about "the Socratic alternative" and was put right very quickly. She was a 
well-spoken young woman whose head was covered by a veil; I had over­
looked her concerns in my anti-clerical and secular zeal. (I nevertheless 
proceeded boldly to my attack!) 
Thus using the very same English of people who aspire to literary accom­
plishments of a very high order, who allow a critical use of the language to 
permit a decolonizing of the mind, as Ngugi wa Thiongo puts it, co-exists 
with very different new communities in a less appealing new configuration. 
In.places where English was once the language of ruler and administrator, 306 FREED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 MIN AT I 0 N IN T HE F U T U R E 
it is a much diminished presence, either a technical language with wholly 
instrumental characteristics and features, or a foreign language with various 
implicit connections to the larger English-speaking world, but its presence 
competes with the impressively formidable emergent reality of organized 
religious fervor: Since the language of Islam is Arabic, a language with 
considerable literary community and hieratic force, English has sunk to a 
low, uninteresting, and attenuated levet 
To gauge this new subordination in an er~ when in other contexts English 
has acquired remarkable prominence and many interesting new communi­
ties of literary, critical, and philosophical practice, we need only briefly 
recall the stunning· acquiescence of the Islamic world to the prohibitions, 
proscriptions, and threats pronounced by Islam's clerical and secular author­
ities against Salman Rushdie because of his novel The Satanic Versei. I do not 
mean that the entire Islamic world acquiesced, but that 'its official agencies 
and spokespeople either blindly rejected or vehemently refused to engage 
with a hook which the enormous majority of people never read. (Khomeini's 
fat'Wa of course went a good deal further than mere rejection, but the Iranian 
position was a relatively isolated one.) That it dealt with Islam in English 
for what was believed to be a largely Western audience was its main offense. 
But, equally important, two factors marked the English-speaking world's 
reaction to the· events surrounding The Satanic Verses. 'One was the virtual 
unanimity of cautious and timid condemnations of Islam, marshalled in a 
cause that appeared to most of the metropolitan writers and intellectuals 
both safe and politically correct. As for the many writers who had been 
murdered, imprisoned, or banned in nations that were either American allies 
(Morocco, Pakistan, Israel) or anti-American so-called "terrorist" states 
(Libya, Iran, Syria), very little was said. And second, once the ritual phrases 
in support of Rushdie and denunciatory of Islam were pronounced, there 
seemed to be not much further interest either in the Islamic world as a whole 
or in conditions of authorship there. Greater enthusiasm and energy might 
have been expended in dialogue with those considerable literary and intel­
lectual figures from the Islamic world (Mahfouz, Darwish, Munif, among 
others) who occasionally defended (and attacked) Rushdie in more trying 
circumstances than those obtaining in Greenwich Village or Hampstead . 
. There are highly significant diformations within the new communities and 
states that now exist alongside and partialiy within the world-' English group 
dominated by the United· States, a group that includes the heterogenous 
voices, various languages, and hybrid forms that give Anglophonic writing 
;its distinctive and still problematic identity. The emergence in recent 
decades of a startlingly sharp construqion called "Islam" is one such defor-. 
ination; others include "Communism," '1apan," and the "West," each of Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
them possessing styles of polemic, batteries of discourse, and an unsettling 
profusion of opporrunities for dissemination. In mapping the vast domains 
commanded by these gigantic caricatural essentializations, we can more 
fully appreciate and interpret the modest gains made by smaller literate 
groups that are bound together not by insensate polemic but by affinities, 
sympathies, and compassion. 
Few people during the exhilarating heyday of decolonization and early 
Third World nationalism were watching or paying close attention to how a 
carefully nurtured nativism in the anti-colonial ranks grew and grew to 
inordinately large proportions. All those nationalist appeals to pure or au­
thentic Islam, or to Afrocentrism, negritude, or Arabism had a strorig response, 
without sufficient consciousness that those ethnicities and spiritual essences 
would come back to exact a very high price from their successful adherents. 
Fanon was one of the few to remark on the dangers posed to a great 
socio-political movement like decolonization by an untutored national con­
sciousness. Much the same could be said about the dangers of an untutored 
religious consciousness. Thus the appearance of various mullahs, colonels, 
and one-party regimes who pleaded national security risks and the need to 
protect the foundling revolutionary state as their platform, foisted a new set 
of problems onto the alr~ady considerably onerous heritage of imperialism. 
It is not possible to name many states or regimes that are exempt from 
active intellectual and historical participation in the new post-colonial inter­
national configuration. National security and a separatist identity are the 
watchwords. Along with authorized figures-the ruler, the national heroes 
and martyrs, the established religious authorities--the newly triumphant 
politicians seemed 'to require borders and passports first of all. What had 
once been the imaginative liberation of a people-.-Aime Cesaire's "inven­
tions of new souls"-and the audacious metaphoric charting of spiritual 
territory usurped by colonial ·masters were quickly translated into and 
accommodated by a world system of barriers, maps, frontiers, police forces, 
customs and exchange controls. The finest, most elegiac commentary on this 
dismal state of affairs was· provided by Basil Davidson in the course of a 
memorial reflection on the legacy of Amflcar Cabral. Rehearsing the ques­
tions. that were never asked about what would happen after liberation, 
Davidson concludes that a deepening crisis brought on neo-imperialism · 
and put petit bourgeois rulers firmly in command. But, he continues, this 
brand of · 
reformist nationalism continues to dig its own grave. As the grave 
deepens fewer and fewer persons in command are able to get their own 
heads above the edge of it To the tune of requiems sung in solemn J08 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
chorus by hosts of foreign experts or would be fundi of one profession 
or another, often on very comfortable (and comforting) salaries, the 
funeral proceeds. The frontiers are there, the frontiers are sacred. What 
else, after all, could guarantee privilege and power to ruling elites? 29 
Chinua Achebe's most recent novel, Anthills-of the Savannah, is a compelling 
survey of this enervating and dispiriting landscape. 
Davidson goes on to modify the gloom of his own description by pointing 
to what he calls the people's "own· solution to this carapace accepted from 
the colonial period." 
What the peoples think upon this subject is shown by their incessant 
emigration across these lines on the map, as well as by their smuggling 
enterprises. So that even while a "bourgeois Africa" hardens its fron­
.tiers, multiplies its border controls, and thunders against the smuggling 
of persons and goods, a "peoples' " Africa works in quite another way. 30 
The cultural correlative of that audacious but often cosdy combination of 
smuggling and emigration is, of course, familiar to us; it is exemplified by 
that new group of writers referred to as cosmopolitan recently in a percep­
tive analysis by Tim Brennan. 31 And crossing borders as well as the repre­
sentative deprivations and exhilarations of migration has become a major 
theme in the art of the post-colonial era. 
Although one may say that these writers and themes constitute a new 
cultural configuration and one may point admiringly to regional aesthetic 
achievements all over the world, I believe we should study the configuration 
from a somewhat less attractive .but, in my opinion, m.ore realistic and 
political point of view. While we should rightly admire both the material 
and the achievements of Rushdie's work, say, as part of a significant forma­
tion within Anglophone literature, we should at the same time note that it 
is encumbered, that aesthetically valuable work may be part of a threatening, 
coercive, or deeply anti-literary, anti-intellectual formation. Before The 
Satanic Vers-es-appeared in 1988, Rushdie was already a problematic figure for 
the English thanks to his essays and earlier novels; to many Indians and 
Pakistanis in England and in the subcontinent, however, he was not only a 
celebrated author they were proud of but also a champion of immigrants' 
rights and a severe critic of nostalgic imperialists. After the fotwa his status 
changed drastically, and he became anathema to his former admirers. To 
have provoked Islamic fundamentalism when once he had been a virtual 
representative oflndian Islam-this testifies to the urgent conjunction of art 
and politics, which can be explosive. Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
"There is no document of civilization which is not at the same time a 
document of barbarism.'' said Walter Benjamin. Those darker connections 
are where today's interesting political and cultural conjunctures are to be 
found. They affect our individual and collective critical work no less than 
the hermeneutic and utopian work we feel easier about when we read, 
W!!CUSS,· and ·reflect on valuable literary texts, 
Let me be more concrete. It is not only tired, harassed, and dispossessed 
refugees who cross borders and try to become acculturated in new environ­
ments; it is also the whole gigantic system of the mass media that is ubiqui­
tous, slipping by most barriers and settling in nearly everywhere. I have said 
that Herbert Schiller and Armand Mattelart have made us aware of the 
domination by a handful of multinationals of the production and distribution 
of journalistic representations; Schiller's most recent study, Culture, Inc., 
describes how it is that all departments of culture, not just news broadcast­
ing, have been invaded by or enclosed within an ever-expanding but small 
circle of privately held corporations. 32 
This has a number of consequences. For one, the international media 
system has in actuality done what idealistic or ideologically inspired notions 
of collectivity-imagined communities-aspire to do. When, for instance, 
we speak about and research something we call Commonwealth literature 
or world literature in English, our efforts are at a putative level, really; 
discussions of magic realism in the Caribbean and African novel, say, may 
allude to or at best outline the contours of a "post-modem" or national field 
that unites these works, but we know that the works and their authors and 
readers are specific to, and articulated in, local circumstances, and these 
· circumstances are usefully kept separate when we analyze the contrasting 
conditions of reception in London or New York on the one hand, the 
peripheries on the other. Compared with the way the four major Western 
news agencies operate, the mode by which international English-language 
television journalists select, gather, and rebroadcast pictorial images from all 
over the world, or the way Hollywood programs like Bonanza and I Love Lucy 
work their way through even the Lebanese civil war, our critical efforts are 
small and primitive, for the media are not only a fully integrated practical 
network, but a very efficient mode of articulation knitting the world together. 
This world system, articulating and. producing culture, economics, and 
political power along with their military and demographic coefficients, has 
an institutionalized tendency to produce om-of-scale trans-national images 
that are now reorienting international social discourse and process. Take as 
a case in point the emergence of "terrorism" and "fundamentalism" as two 
key terms of the r98os. For one, you could hardly begin (in the public space 
provided by international discourse) to analyze political condicts involving 310 FREED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 MIN AT I 0 N IN T HE FUTURE 
Sunnis and Shi'is, Kurds and Iraqis, or Tamils and Sinhalese, or Sikhs and 
Hindus-the list is long-without eventually having to resort to the catego­
ries and. images of "terrorism" and "fundamentalism," which derived en­
tirely from the concerns and intellectual factories in metropolitan centers 
like Washington and London. They are fearful images that lack discriminate 
contents or definition, but they signify moral power and approval for who­
ever uses them, moral defensiveness and criminalization for whomever they 
designate. These two gigantic reductions mobilized armies as well as dis­
persed communities. Not Iran's official reaction to Rushdie's novel, or the 
unofficial enthusiasm for him among Islamic communities in the West, or 
the public and private expression of outrage in the West against the fot'Wil 
is intelligible, in my opinion, without reference to the overall logic and the 
minute articulations and reactions set in motion by the overbearing system 
I have been trying to describe. 
So it is that in the fairly open environment of communities of readers 
inrer.ested, for example, in emergent post-colonial Anglophone or Franco­
phone lite~ture, the underlying configurations are directed and controlled 
not by processes of hermeneutic investigation, or by sympathetic and literate 
intuition, or by informed reading, but by much coarser and more instrumen­
tal processes whose goal is to mobilize consent, to eradicate dissent, to 
promote an almost literally blind patriotism. By such means the governabil­
ity oflarge numbers of people is assured, numbers whose potentially disrup­
tive ambitions for democracy and expression are held down (or narcotized) 
in mass societies, including, of course, Western ones. 
The fear and terror induced by the overscale images of "terrorism" and 
"fundamentalism"--<:all them the figures of an international or trans­
national imaginary made up of foreign devils-hastens the individual's 
subordination to the dominant norms of the moment. This is as true in the 
new post-colonial societies as it is in the Wes.t generally and the United 
States particularly. Thus to oppose the abnormality and extremism embed­
ded in terrorism and fundamentalism-my example has only a small degree 
of parody-is also to uphold the moderation, rationality, executive central­
ity of a vaguely designated "Western" (or otherwise local a~d patriotically 
assumed) ethos. The irony is that far from endowing theW estern ethos with 
the confidence and secure "normality" we associate with privilege and 
rectitude, this dynamic imbues "us", with a righteous anger and defen~ive­
ness in which "others" are finally seen as enemies, bent on destroying our 
civilization and way of life. 
This is a mere sketch of how these patterns of coercive orthodoxy and 
self-aggrandizement further strengthen the power of unthinking assent and 
unchallengeable doctrine. As these are slowly perfected over time and much Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority. 
repetition, they are answered, alas, with corresponding finality by the desig­
nated enemies. Thus Muslims or Africans or Indians or Japanese, in their 
idioms and from within their own threatened localities, attack the West, or 
Americanization, or imperialism, with little more attention to detail; critical 
differentiation, discrimination, and distinction than has been lavished on 
them by the West. The same is true for Americans, to whom patriotism is 
next to godliness. This is an ultimately senseless dynamic. Whatever the 
"border wars" have as aims, they are impoverishing. One must join the 
primordial or constituted group; or, as a subaltern Other, one must accept 
inferior status; or one must light to the death. 
These border wars are an expression of essentializations--Africanizing 
the African, Orientalizing the Oriental, W esterni~ing the Western, Ameri­
canizing the American, for an indefinite time and with no alternative (since 
African, Oriental, Western essences can only remain essences)-a pattern 
that has been held over from the era of classic imperialism and its systems. 
What resists it? One obvious instance is identified by Immanuel Wallerstein 
as what he calls anti-systemic movements, which emerged as a consequence 
of historical capitalism.n There have been enough cases of these latecoming 
movements in recent times to hearten even the most intransigent pessimist: 
the democracy movements on all sides of the socialist divide, the Palestinian 
intifada, various social, ecological, and cultural movements throughout 
North and South America, the women's movement. Yet it is difficult for 
these movements to be interested in the world beyond their own borders, or 
to have the capacity and freedom to generalize about it. If you are part of 
a Philippine, or Palestinian, or Brazilian oppositional movement, you must 
deal with the tactical and logistical requirements of the daily struggle. Yet 
I do think that efforts of this kind are developing, if not a general theory, 
then a common discursive readiness or, to put it territorially, an under­
lying world map. Perhaps we may start to speak of this somewhat elusive 
oppositional mood, and its emerging strategies, as an internationalist 
counter-articulation. 
What new or newer kind of intellectual and cultural politics does this 
internationalism call for?J4 What important transformations and transfigura­
tions should there be in our traditionally and Eurocentrically defined ideas 
of the writer, the intellectual, the critic? English and French are world 
languages, and the logics of borders and warring essences are totalizing, so 
we should begin by acknowledging that the map of the world has no divinely 
or dogmatically sanctioned spaces, essences, or privileges. However, we may 
speak of secular space, and of humanly constructed and interdependent 
histories that are fundamentally knowable, although not through grand 
theory or systematic totalization. Throughout this book, I have been saying 311 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
that human experience is finely textured, dense, and accessible enough not 
to need extra-historical or extra-worldly agencies to illuminate or explain 
it. I am talking about a way of regarding our world as amenable to investiga­
tion and interrogation without magic keys, special jargons and instruments, 
curtained-off practices. 
We need a different and innovative paradigm for humanistic research. 
Scholars can be frankly engaged in the politics and interests of the present­
with open eyes, rigorous analytical energy, and the decently social values of 
those who are concerned with the survival neither of a disciplinary fiefdom 
or guild nor of a manipulative identity like "India" or "America," but with 
the improvement and non-coercive enhancement of life in a community 
struggling to exist among other communities. One must not minimize the 
inventive excavations ~equired in this work. One is not looking for uniquely 
original essences, either to restore them or to set them in a place of unim­
peachable honor. Th,e study of Indian history is viewed by Subaltern Studiet, 
for example, as an ongoing contest between classes and their disputed 
epistemologies; similarly, "Englishness" for the contributors to the three­
volume Patri'otitm edited by Raphael Samuel is not given priority before 
history, any more than "Attic civilization" in Bernal's Black Athena is made 
simply to serve as an ahistorical model of a superior civilization. 
The idea ,behind these works is that orthodox, authoritatively national 
and institutional versions of history tend principally to freeze provisional 
and highly contestable versions of history into official identities. Thus the 
official version of British history embedded, say, in the durbars arranged for 
Q!leen Victoria's Indian Viceroy in 1876 pretends that British rule had an 
almost mythical longevity over India; traditions oflndian service, obeisance, 
and subordination are implicated, in, these ceremonies so as to create the 
image of an entire continent's trans-historical identity pressed into compli­
ance before the image of a Britain whose own constructed identity is that 
it has ruled and must always rule both the waves and India.H Whereas 
these official versions of history try to do this for identitarian authority (to 
use Adornian terms)-the caliphate, the state, the orthodox clerisy, the 
Establishment-the disenchantments, the disputatious and systematically 
skeptical investigations in the innovative work I have cited submit 
these composite, hybrid identities to a negative dialectic which dissolves 
them into variously constructed components. What matters a great deal 
more than the stable identity kept current in official discourse is the con­
testatory force of an interpretative method whose material is the disparate, 
but intenwined and interdependent, and above all overlapping streams of 
historical experience. 
A superbly audacious instance of this force can be found in interpretations Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
of the Arabic literary and culrural tradition ventured by today's leading Arab 
poet, Adonis, the pen name of Ali Ahmed Said. Since the three volumes of 
AI-Thabit wa ai-Mutahawwil were published between 1974 and 1978, he has 
almost single-handedly been challenging the persistence of what he regards 
as the ossified, tradition-bound Arab-Islamic heritage, sruck not only in the 
past but in rigid and authoritarian rereadings of that past. The purpose of 
these rereadings, he has said, is to keep the Arabs from truly encountering 
modernity (al-hadatba). In his book on Arab poetics Adonis associates literal, 
hard-bound readings of great Arab poetry with the ruler, whereas an imagi­
native reading reveals that at the heart of the classical tradition--even 
including the Koran-a subversive and dissenting strain counters the appar­
ent orthodoxy proclaimed by the temporal authorities. He shows how the 
rule oflaw in Arab society separates power from critique and tradition from 
innovation, thereby confining history to an exhausting code of endlessly 
reiterated precedents. To this system he opposes the dissolving powers of 
critical modernity: 
Those in power designated everyone who did not think according to 
the culrure of the caliphate as "the people of innovation" ( ahl ai-ihdath), 
excluding them with this indictment of heresy from their Islamic affil­
. iation. This explains how· the terms ibdath (modernity) and mubdatb 
(modern, new), used to characterize the poetry which violated the 
ancient poetic principles, came originally from the religious lexicon. 
Consequently we can see that the modem in poetry appeared to the 
ruling establishment as a political or intellecrual attack on the culture 
of the regime and a rejection of the idealized standards· of the ancient, 
and how, therefore, in Arab life the poetic has always been mixed up 
with the political and religious, and indeed continues to be so.36 
Although the work of Adonis and his associates in the journal Mawaqifis 
scarcely known outside the Arab world, it can be seen as part of a much 
larger international configuration that includes the Field Day writers in 
Ireland, the Subaltern Studirs group in India, most of the dissenting writers 
in Eastern Europe, and many Caribbean intellectuals and artists whose 
heritage is traced to C.L.R. James (Wilson Harris, George Lamming, Eric 
Williams, Derek Walcott, Edward Braithwaite, the early V. S. Naipaul). For 
all these movements and individuals, the cliches and patriotic idealizations 
of official history can be dissolved, along with their legacy of intellectual 
bondage and defensive recriminations. As Seamus Deane put it for the Irish 
case; "The myth of Irishness, the notion of Irish unreality, the notions 
surrounding Irish eloquence, are all political themes upon which the litera-314 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN 'EHE FUTURE 
ture has battened to an extreme degree since the nineteenth century when 
the idea of national character was invented." 37 The job facing the cultural 
intellectual is therefore not to accept the politics of identity as given, but to 
show how all representations are constructed, for what purpose, by whom, 
and with what components. 
This is far from easy. An alarming defensiveness has crept into America's 
official image of itself, especially in its representations of the national past. 
Every society and official tradi~on defends itself against interferences with 
its sanctioned narratives; over time these acquire an almost theological 
status, with founding heroes, cherished ideas and values, national allegories 
having an inestimable effect in cultural and political life. Two of these 
elements--America as a pioneering' societY and American political life as a 
direct rellection of democratic practices--have come under recent scrutiny, 
with a resulting furor that has been quite remarkable. In both cases there has 
been some but by no means enough serious and secular intellectual effort by 
intelleCtuals themselves to accept critical views; rather like the media an­
chorpersons who internalize the norms of power, they have internalized 
norms of official self-identity. 
Consider 1'America as West," an exhibition mounted at the National 
Gallery of American Art in '99Ii the gallery is part of the Smithsonian 
Institution, maintained in part by the federal government. According to the 
exhibit, the conquest of the West and its subsequent incorporation into the 
United States had been transformed into a heroic meliorist narrative that 
disguised, romanticized, or simply eliminated the many-sided truth about 
the aetual process of conquest, as well as the destruction of both native 
Americans and the environment. Images of the Indian in nineteenth-century 
American paintings, for example--noble, proud, reflective--were set 
against a running text on the same wall that described the native American's 
degradations at the hands of the white man. Such "deconstructions" as this 
stirred the ire of members of Congress, whether they had seen the exhibition 
or not; they found its unpatriotic or un-American slant unacceptable, espe­
cially for a federal institution, to exhibit. Professors, pundits, and journalists 
attacked what they considered a malign slur on the United States' "unique­
ness," which, in the words of a Washington Post writer, is the "hope and 
optimism of its founding, the promise of its bounty, and the persevering 
efforts of its government." 38 There were only a few exceptions to this view, 
for example Robert Hughes, who wrote in Time (May 31, 1991) about the art 
exhibited as "a foundation myth in paint and stone." 
That a strange mixture ofinvention, history, and self-aggrandizement had 
gone into this national origin story as it does into all of them was ruled by 
a semi-official consensus to be not fit for America. Paradoxically, the United Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
States, as an immigrant society composed of many cultures, has a public 
discourse more policed, more anxious to depict the country as free from 
taint, more unified around one iron-dad major narrative of innocent tri­
umph. This effort to keep thingS 'simple and good disaffiliates the country 
from its relationship with other societies and peoples, thereby· reinforcing its 
remoteness and insularity. 
Another extraordinary case was the controversy surrounding Oliver 
Stone's seriously flawed film JFI(, released in late 1991, the premise of which 
was that Kennedy's assassination had been planned in a conspiracy ofAmer­
icans who opposed h~s desire to end the war in Viemam. Granted that the 
film was ·uneven and confused, and granted that Stone's main reason for 
making it may have been only commercial, why did so many unofficial 
agencies of cultural authority-newspapers of record, establishment histori­
ans, politicians-think it important to attack the film? It takes very little for 
a non-American to accept as a starting point that most, if not all, political 
assassinations are conspiracies, because that is the way the world is. But a 
chorus of American sages takes acres of print to deny that conspiracies occur 
in America, since "we" represent a new, and better, and more innocent 
world. At the same time there is plentiful evidence of official .American 
conspiracies and assassination attempts against the sanctioned "foreign 
devils" (Castro, Q!lddafi, Saddam Hussein, and so on). The connections are 
not made, and the reminders remain unpronounced. 
A set of major corollaries derives from this. If the chief, most official, 
forceful, and coercive identity is of a state with its borders, customs, ruling 
. parties and authorities, official narratives and images, and if intellectuals 
consider that that identity is in need of constant criticism and analysis, then 
it must follow that other similarly.constructed identities need similar inves­
tigation and interrogation. The education of those of us who are interested 
in literature and the study of cu.lture has for the most part been organized 
under various rubrics-the creative writer, the self-sufficient and autono­
mous work, the national literature, the separate genres-that have acquired 
almost fetishistic presence. Now it would be insane to argue that individual 
writers and works do not exist, that French, Japanese, and Arabic are not 
separate things, or that Milton, Tagore, and Alejo Carpentier are only 
trivially different variations on the same theme. Neither am I saying that an 
essay about Great Expeaatiom and Dickens's actual novel Great Expectations 
are the same thing. But I am saying that "identity" does not necessarily 
imply ontologically given and eternally determined stability, or uniqueness, 
or irreducible character, o.r privileged status as something total and complete 
in and of itsel£ I would prefer to interpret a novel as the choice of one mode 
of writing from among many others, and the activity of writing as one social 316 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
mode among several, and the category of literature as something created to 
serve various worldly aims, including and perhaps even mainly aesthetic 
ones. Thus the focus in the destabilizing and investigative attitudes of those 
whose work actively opposes states and borders is on how a work of art, for 
instance, begins tu a work, begins from a political, social, cultural situation, 
begins to do certain things and not others. 
The modern history ofliterary study has been bound up with the devel­
opment of cultural nationalism, whose aim was first to distinguish the na­
tional canon, then to maintain its eminence, authority, and aesthetic 
autonomy. Even in discussions concerning culture in general that seemed to 
rise above national differences in deference to a universal sphere, hierarchies 
and ethnic preferences (as between European and non-European) were held 
to. This is· as true Of Matthew Arnold as it is of twentieth-century cultural 
and philological critics whom I revere-Auerbach, Adorno, Spitzer, Black­
mur. For them all, their culture was in a sense the only culture. The threats 
against it were largely internal-for the modern ones they were fascism and 
communism-and what they upheld was European bourgeois humanism. 
Neither the ethos nor the rigorous training required to install that bildung 
nor the extraordinary discipline it demanded has survived, although occa­
sionally one hears the accents of admiration and retrospective discipleship; 
but no critical work done now resembles work on the order of Mimeris. 
Instead of European bourgeois humanism, the basic premise now is' provided 
by a residue of nationalism, with its.various derivative authorities, in alliance 
with a professionalism that divides material into fields, subdivisions, special­
ties, accreditations, and the like. The surviving doctrine of aesthetic auton­
omy has dwindled into a formalism associated with one or another 
professional method-structuralism,· deconstruction, etc. 
A look at some of the new academic fields that have been created since 
World War Two, and especially as a result of non-European nationalist 
struggles, reveals a different topography and a different set of imperatives. 
On the one hand, most students and teachers of non-European literatures 
today must from the outset take account of the politics of what they study; 
one cannot postpone discussions of slavery, colonialism, racism in any seri­
ous investigations of modern Indian, African, Latin and North American, 
Arabic, Caribbean, and Commonwealth literature. Nor is it intellectually 
responsible to discuss them without referring to their embattled circum­
stances either in post-colonial societies or as marginalized and/or subju­
gated subjects confined to secondary spots in the curricula in metropolitan 
centers. Nor can one hide in positivism or empiricism and offhandedly 
"require" the weapons of theory. On the other hand, it is a mistake to argue 
that the "other" non-European literatures, those with more obviously Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
worldly affiliations to power and politics, can be studied "respectably," as if 
they were in actuality as high, autonomous, aesthetically independent, and 
satisfying as Western literatures have been made to be. The notion ofblack 
skin in a white mask is no more serviceable and dignified in literary study 
than it is in politics. Emulation and mimicry do not get one very far. 
Contamination is the wrong word to use here, but some notion of litera­
ture and indeed all culture as hybrid (in Homi Bhabha's complex sense of 
that word) 39 and encumbered, or entangled and overlapping with what used 
to be regarded as extraneous elements--this strikes me as the essential idea 
for the revolutionary realities today, in which the contests of the secular 
world so provocatively inform the texts we both read and write. We can no 
longer afford conceptions of history that stress linear development or 
Hegelian transcendence, any more than we can accept geographical or 
territorial assumptions that assign centrality to the Atlantic world and con­
genital and even delinquent peripherality to non-Western regions. If 
configurations like "Anglophone literature" or "world literature" are to have 
any meaning at all, it is therefore because by their existence and actuality 
today they testify to the contests and continuing struggles by virtue of which 
they emerged both as texts and as historical experiences, and because they 
challenge so vigorously the nationalist basis for the composition and study 
of literature, and the lofty independence and indifference with which it had 
been customary to regard the metropolitan Western literatures. 
Once we accept the actual configuration of literary experiences overlap­
ping with one another and interdependent, despite national boundaries and 
.-coercively legislated national autonomies, history and geography are trans­
figured in new maps, in new and far less stable entities, in new types of 
connections. Exile, far from being the fate of nearly forgotten unfortunates 
who are dispossessed and expatriated, becomes something closer to a norm, 
an experience of crossing boundaries and charting new territories in defiance 
of the classic canonic enclosures, however much its loss and sadness should 
be acknowledged and registered. Newly changed models and types jostle 
against the older ones. The reader and writer of literature--which itself 
loses its perdurable forms and accepts the testimonials, revisions, notations 
of the post-colonial experience, including underground life, slave narratives, 
women's literature, and prison-no longer need to be tied to an image of the 
poet or scholar in isolation, secure, stable, national in identity, class, gender, 
or profession, but can think and experience with Genet in Palestine or 
Algeria, with Tayeb Salih as a Black man in London, with Jamaica Kincaid 
in the white world, with Rushdie in India and Britain, and so on. 
We must expand the horizons against which the questions of hfrw and what 
to read and write are both posed and answered. To paraphrase a remark 318 FREED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 M IN AT I 0 N IN THE FUTURE 
made by Erich Auerbach in one of his last essays, our philological home is 
the world, and not the nation or even the individual writer. This means that 
we professional students of literature must take account of a number of 
astringent issues here, at the risk of both unpopularity and accusations of 
megalomania. For in an age of the mass media and what I have called the 
manufacture of consent, it is Panglossian to imagine that the careful reading 
of a few works of art considered humanistically, professionally, or aestheti­
cally significant is anything but a private activity with only slender public 
consequences. Texts are protean things; they are tied to circumstances and 
to politics large and small, and these require attention and criticism. No one 
can take Stock of everything, of course, just as no one theory can explain or 
account for the connections ·among texts and societies. But reading and 
writing texts are never neutral activities: there are interests, powers, pas­
sions, pleasures entailed no matter how aesthetic or entertaining the work. 
Media, political economy, mass institutions--in fine, the tracings of secular 
power and the influence of the state--are pan of what we call literature. And 
just as it is true that we cannot read literature by men without also reading 
literature by women--so transfigured has been the shape of literature--it is 
also true that we cannot deal with the literature of the peripheries without 
also attending to the literature of the metropolitan centers. 
Instead of the partial analysis offered by the various national or systemati­
cally theoretical schools, I have been proposing the contrapuntal lines of a 
global analysis, in which texts and worldly institutions are seen working 
together, in which Dickens and Thackeray as London authors are read also 
as writers whose historical experience is informed by the colonial enter­
prises in India and Australia of which they were so aware, and in which the 
literature of one commonwealth is involved in the literatures of others. 
Separatist or nativist enterprises strike me as exhausted; the ecology of 
literature's new and expanded meaning cannot be attached to only one 
essence or to the discrete idea of one thing. But this global, contrapuntal 
analysis should be modelled not (as earlier notions of comparative literatrire 
were) on a symphony but rather on an atonal ensemble; we must take into 
account all sorts of spatial or geographical and rhetorical practices--inflec­
tions, limits, constraints, intrusions, inclusions, prohibitions--all of them 
tending to elucidate a complex and uneven topography. A gifted critic's 
intuitive synthesis, of the type volunteered by hermeneutic or philological 
interpretation (whose prototype is Dilthey), is still of value, but strikes me 
as the poignant reminder of a serener time than ours. 
This brings us once again to the question of politics. No country is exempt 
from the debate about what is to be read, taught, or written. I have often 
envied American theorists for whom radical skepticism or deferential rever-Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
ente of the status quo are real alternatives. I do not feel them as such, 
perhaps because my own history and situation do not allow such lu~ry, 
detachment, or satisfaction. Yet I do believe that some literature is actually 
good, and that some is bad, and I remain as conservative as a~yone when it 
comes to, if not the redemptive value of reading a classic rather than staring 
at a television screen, then the potential enhancement of one's sensibility 
and consciousness by doing so, by the exercise of one's mind. I suppose the 
issue reduces itself to what our humdrum and pedestrian daily. work, what 
we do as readers and writers, is all about, when on the one hand professional­
ism· and patriotism will not serve and on the other waiting for apocalyptic 
change will not either. I keep coming back-simplistically and idealisti­
cally-to the notion of opposing and alleviating coercive domination, trans­
forming the present by trying rationally and analytically to lift some of its 
burdens, situating the works of various literatures with reference to one 
another. and to their historical modes of being. What I am saying is that ih 
the configurations and by virtue of the transfigurations taking place around 
us, readers and writers are now in fact secular intellectuals with the archival, 
expressive, elaborative, and moral responsibilities of that role. 
For American intellectuals considerably more is at stake. We are formed 
. by our country, and it has an enormous global presence. There is a serious 
issue posed by the opposition of, say, Paul Kennedy's work-arguing that all 
great empires decline because they overextend themselves 40-and Joseph 
Nye's, in whose 'new preface to Bound to Lead the American imperial claim 
to be number one, especially after the Gulf War, is reasserted. The evidence 
is in Kennedy's favor, but Nye is too intelligent not to understand that "the 
problem for United States power in the twenty-first century will not be new 
challenges for hegemony but the new challenges of transnational interde­
pendence."41 Yet he concludes that "the United States remains the largest 
and richest power with the greatest capacity to shape the furore. And in a 
democracy, the choices are the people's." 42 The question is, though, do "the 
people" have direct access to power? Or are the presentations of that power 
so organized and culturally processed as to require a different analysis? 
To speak of relendess commodification· and specialization in this world, 
is, I think, to begin to formulate the analysis, especially since the American 
cult of expertise and professionalism, which has hegemony in cultural dis­
course, and the hypertrophy of vision and will are ·so advanced. Rarely 
before in human history has there been so massive an intervention of force 
and ideas from one culture to another as there is today from America to the 
rest of the world (Nye is right about this), and I shall return to the issue a 
little later. Yet it is also true that in the main we have rarely been so 
fragmented, so sharply reduced, and so completely diminished in our sense po FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
of what our true (as opposed to asserted) cultural identity is. The fantastic 
explosion of specialized and separatist knowledge is partly to blame: Afro­
centrism, Eurocentrism, Occidentalism, feminism, Marxism, deconstruc­
tionism, etc. The schools disable and disempower what was empowering and 
interesting about the original insights. And this in turn has cleared the space 
for a sanctioned rhetoric of national cultural purpose, well-embodied in 
such documents as the Rockefeller Foundation-commissioned study The 
Humanities in American Life,43 or, more recently and more politically, the 
various expostulations of the former secretary of education (and former head 
of the National Endowment for th,e Humanities) William Bennett, speaking 
(in his "To Reclaim a Heritage") not simply as a cabinet officer in the 
Reagan administration, but as self-designated spokesman for the West, a sort 
of Head of the Free World. He was joined by Allan Bloom and his followers, 
intellectuals who consider the appearance in the academic world of women, 
African-Americans, gays, and Native Americans, all of them speaking with 
genuine multiculturalism and new know ledge, as a barbaric threat to "West­
ern Civilization." 
What do these "state of the culture" screeds tell us? Simply that the 
humanities are important, central, traditional, inspiring. Bloom wants us to 
read only a handful of Greek and Enlightenment philosophers in keeping 
with his theory about higher education in the United States being for "the 
elite." Bennett goes as far as saying that we can "have" the humanities by 
"reclaiming'' our traditions--the collective pronouns and the proprietary 
accents are important-through twenty or so major texts. If every American 
student were required to read Homer, Shakespeare, the Bible, andjetferson, 
then we would achieve a full sense of national purpose. Underlying these 
epigonal replications of Matthew Arnold's exhortations to the significance of 
culture is the social authority of patriotism, the fortifications of identity 
brought to us by "our" culture, whereby we can confront the world defiantly 
and self-confidently; in Francis Fukuyama's triumphalist proclamation, "we" 
Americans can see ourselves as realizing the end of history. 
This is an extremely drastic delimitation of what we have learned about 
culture-its productivity, its diversity of components, its critical and often 
contradictory energies, its radically antithetical characteristics, and above all 
its rich worldliness and complicity with imperial conquest anti liberation. 
We are told that cultural or humanistic study is the recovery oftheJudeo­
Christian or Western heritage, free from native American culture (which the 
Judeo-Christian tradition in its early American embodiments set about to 
massacre) and from that tradition's adventures in the non-Western world. 
Yet the multicultural disciplines have in fact found a hospitable haven in 
the contemporary American academy, and this is a historical fact of extraor-Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 
dinary magnitude. To a great degret; William Bennett has had this as his 
target, as do Dinesh D'Souza, Roger Kimball, and Alvin Kernan; whereas we 
would have thought that it has always been a legitimate conception of the 
modem university's secular mission (as described by Alvin Gouldner) to be a 
place where multiplicity and contradiction co-exist with established dogma 
and canonical doetrine. This is now refuted by a new conservative dog­
matism claiming "political correctness" as its enemy. The neo-conservative 
supposition is that in admitting Marxism, structuralism, feminism, and 
Third World studies into the curriculum (and before that an entire genera­
tion of refugee scholars), the American university sabotaged the basis of its 
supposed authority and is now ruled by a Blanquist cabal of intolerant 
ideologues who "control" it. 
The irony is that it has been the university's practice to admit the 
subversions of cultural theory in order to some degree to neutralize them by 
fixing them in the status of academic subspecialties. So now we have the 
curious spectacle of teachers teaching theories that have been completely 
displaced-wrenched is the better word-from their contexts; I have else­
where called this phenomenon "travelling theory." 44 In various academic 
departments-among them literature, philosophy, and history-theory is 
taught so as to make the strident believe that he or she can become a Marxist, 
a feminist, an Mrocentrist, or a deconstructionist with about the same effort 
and commitment required in choosing items from a menu. Over and above 
that trivialization is a steadily more powerful cult of professional expertise, 
whose main ideological burden stipulates that social, political, anq class-
_based commitments should be subsumed under the professional disciplines, 
so that if you are a professional scholar of literature or critic of culture, all 
your affiliations with the real world are subordinate to your professing in 
those fields. Similarly, you are responsible not so much to an audience in 
your community or society, as· to and for your corporate guild of fellow 
experts, your department of specialization, your discipline. In the same spirit 
and by the same law of the division of labor, those whose job is "foreign 
affairs" or "Slavic or Middle Eastern area studies" attend ro those matters 
and keep out of yours. Thus your ability to sell, market, promote, and 
package your expertise-from university to university, from publisher to 
publisher, from market to market-is protected, its value maintained, your 
competence enhanced. Robert McCaughey has written an interesting study 
of how this process works in international affairs; the tide tells the whole 
story: International Studies and Academic Enterpnse: A Chapter in the Enclosure of 
American Learning,•s 
I am not discussing here all cultural practices in contemporary American 
society-very far from it. But I am describing a particularly influential 312 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
formation that has a decisive bearing on the relationship, inherited histori­
cally by the United States from Europe in the·twentieth century, between 
culture and imperialism. Exp~rtise in foreign policy has never been more 
profitable than it is today-hence never as sequestered from public tamper­
ing. So on the one hand we have the co-optations of foreign-area expenise 
by the academy (only expens on India can talk about India, only Africanists 
about Africa), and on the other reaffirmations of these co-optations by both 
the media and the government These rather slow and silent processes are 
put in stanling evidence, revealed impressively and suddenly, during peri­
ods offoreign crisis for the United States and its interests--for example, the 
Iranian hostage crisis, the shooting down of Korean Airlines flight oo7, the 
Achille Lauro affair, the Libyan, Panamanian, and Iraqi wars. Then, as if by 
an open sesame as unatguably obeyed as it is planned to the last detail, 
public awareness is saturated with media analysis and stupendous coverage. 
Thus experience is emasculated. Adorno says: 
The total obliteration of the war by information, propaganda, commen­
taries, with cameramen in the first tanks and war reporters dying heroic 
deaths, the mishmash of an enlightened manipulation of public opinion 
and oblivious activity: all this is another expression for the withering 
of experience, the vacuum between men and their fate, in which their 
. real fate lies. It is as if the reified, hardened plaster-cast of events takes 
the place of events themselves~ Men are reduced to walk-on parts in a 
monster documentary-film."' 
It would be irresponsible to dismiss the effects that American electronic 
media coverage of the non-Western world-and the consequent displace­
ments in print culture--has on American attitudes to, and foreign .policy 
toward, that world. I argued the case in 198147 (and it is more true today) that 
limited public effect on the media's performance coupled with an almost 
p~rfect correspondence between prevailing government policy and the ide­
ology ruling news presentation and selection (an agenda set by certified 
experts hand in hand with media managers) keeps the United States' impe­
rial perspective toward the non-Western world consistent. As a result 
United States policy has been supported by a dominant culture that does not 
oppose its main tenets: support for dictatorial and unpopular regimes, for a 
scale of violence out of all proponion to the violence of native insurgency 
against American allies, for a steady hostility to the legitimacy of native 
nationalism. 
The concurrence between such notions and the world-view promulgated 
by the. media is quite exact. The history of other cultures is non-existent G_halknging Orthodoxy and Authority 
until it erupts in confrontation with the United States; most of what counts 
about foreign societies is compressed into thirty-second items, "sound'" 
bites," and into the question of whether they are pro-or anti-America, 
freedom, capitalism, democracy. Most Americans today know and discuss 
sports with greater skill than they do their own government's behavior in 
Africa, Indochina, or Latin America; a recent poll showed that 89 percent of 
high school juniors believed that Toronto was in Italy. As framed by the 
media, the choice facing professional interpreters of, or experts on, "other" 
. peoples is to tell the public whether what is happening is "good" for America 
or not-as if what is "good" could be articulated in fifteen-second sound 
bites-and then to recommend a policy for action. Every commentator or 
expert a potencial secretary of state for a few minutes. 
The internalization of norms used in cultural discourse, the rules to 
follow when statements are made, the "history" that is made official as 
opposed to the hismry that is not: all these of course are ways to regulate 
public discussion in all societies. The difference here is that the epic scale 
of United States global power and the corresponding power of the national 
domestic consensus created by the electronic media have no precedents. 
Never has there been a consensus so difficult to oppose nor so easy and 
logical to capitulate to unconsciously. Conrad saw KurtZ as a European in 
the African jungle and Gould as an enlightened Westerner in the South 
American mountains, capable of both civilizing and obliterating the natives; 
the same power, on a world scale, is true of the United States today, despite 
its declining economic power. 
My analysis would be incomplete were I not to mention another impor-
'tant ~lement. In speaking of control and consensus, I have used the word 
"hegemony" purposely, despite Nye's disclaimer that the United States does 
not now aim for it. It is not a question of a directly imposed regime of 
conformity in the correspondence between contemporary United States 
cultural discourse and United States policy in the subordinate, non-Western 
world. Rather, it is a system of pressures and constraints by which the whole 
cultural corpus retains its essentially imperial identity and its direction. This 
is why it is accurate to say that a mainstream culture has a certain regularity, 
integrity, or predictability over time. Another way of putting this is to say 
that one can recognize new patterns of dominance, to borrow from Fredric 
Jameson's description of post-modernism, 48 in contemporary culture. Jame­
son's argument is yoked to his description of consumer culture, whose 
central features are a new relationship with the past based on pastiche and 
nostalgia, a new and eclectic randomness in the cultural artefact, a reorgani­
zation of space, and characteristics of multinational capital. To this we must 
add the culture's phenomenally incorporative capacity, which makes it 324 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE .FUTURE 
possible for anyone in fact to say anything at all, but everything is processed 
either toward the dominant mainstream or out to the margins. 
Marginalization in American culture means a kind of unimponant pro­
vinciality.lt means the inconsequence associated with what is not major, not 
central, not powerful-in short, it means association with what are consid­
ered euphemistically as "alternative" modes, alternative states, peoples, 
cultures, alternative theaters, presses, newspapers, anists, scholars, and 
styles, which may later become central or at least fashionable. The new 
images of centrality-directly connected with what C. Wright Mills called 
the power elite--supplant the slower, reflective, less immediate and rapid 
processes of print culture, with its encoding of the attendant and recalcitrant 
categories of historical class, inherited property, and traditional privilege. 
The executive presence is central in American culture today: the president, 
the television commentator, the corporate official, celebrity. Centrality is 
identity, what is powerful, important, and ours. Centrality maintains balance 
between extremes; it endows ideas with the balances of moderation, ratio­
nality,_ pragmatism; it holds the middle together. 
And centrality gives rise to semi-official narratives that authorize and 
provoke cenain sequences of cause and effect, while at the same time 
preventing counter-narratives from emerging. The commonest sequence is 
the old one that America; a force for good in the world, regularly comes up 
against obstacles posed by foreign conspiracies, ontologically mischievous 
and "against" America. Thus American aid to Vietnam and Iran was cor­
rupted by communists on the one hand and terrorist fundamentalists on the 
other, leading to humiliation and bitter disappointment. Conversely, during 
the Cold War, the valiant Afghanistani moujahidin (freedom fighters), Po­
land's Solidarity movement, Nicaraguan "contras," Angolan rebels, Salva­
doran regulars--all of whom "we" suppon-left to our proper devices 
would be victorious with "our" help, but the meddlesome efforts of liberals 
at home and disinformation experts abroad reduced our ability to help. Until 
the GulfWar, when "we" finally rid ourselves of the "Vietnam syndrome." 
These subliminally available capsule histories are refracted superbly in 
the novels of E. L. Doctorow, Don DeLillo, and Robert Stone, and merci­
lessly analyzed by journalists like Alexander Cockburn, Christopher Hitch­
ens, Seymour Hersh, and in the tireless work ofNoam Chomsky. But these 
official narratives still have the power to interdict, marginalize, and criminal­
ize alternative versions of the same history-in Vietnam, Iran, the Middle 
East, Africa, Central America, Eastern Europe. A simple empirical demon­
stration of what I mean is what happens when you are given the opponunity 
to express a more complex, less sequential history: in fact you are compelled 
to retell the "facts" in such a way as to be inventing a language from scratch, Challenging Orthodoxy and Authority 325 
as was the case with the Gulf War examples I discussed earlier. The most 
difficult thing to say during the Gulf War was that foreign societies in history 
and at present may not have assented to the imposition of Western political 
and military power, not because there was anything inherently evil about 
that power but because they felt it to be alien. To venture so apparently 
uncontroversial a truth about how all cultures in fact behave was nothing 
less than an act of delinquency; the opportunity offered you to say something 
in the name of pluralism and fairness was sharply restricted to inconsequen­
tial bursts of facts, stamped as either extreme or irrelevant. With no accept­
able narrative to rely on, with no sustained permission to narrate, you feel 
crowded out and silenced. 
To complete this rather bleak picture, let me add a few final observations 
about the Third World. Obviously we cannot discuss the non-Western 
world as disjunct from developments in the West. The ravages of colonial 
wars, the protracted conflicts between insurgent nationalism and anomalous 
imperialist control, the disputatious new fundamentalist and nativist move­
ments nourished by despair and anger, the extension of the world system 
over the developing world-these circumstances are directly connected to 
actualities in the West. On the one hand, as Eqbal Ahmad says in the best 
account of these circumstances we have, the peasant and pre-capitalist 
classes that predominated during the era of classical colonialism have dis­
persed in the new states into new, often abruptly urbanized and restless 
classes tied to the absorptive economic and political power of the metropoli­
tan West. In Pakistan and Egypt, for example, the contentious fundamental­
ists are led not by peasant or working-class intellectuals but by 
Western-educated engineers, doctors, lawyers. Ruling minorities emerge 
with the new deformations in the new structures ofpower. 49 These patholo­
gies, and the disenchantment with authority they have caused, run the 
gamut from the neo-fascist to the dynastic-oligarchic, with only a few states 
retaining a functioning parliamentary and democratic system. On the other 
hand, the crisis of the Third World does present challenges that suggest 
considerable scope for what Ahmad calls "a logic of daring." 50 In having to 
give up traditional beliefs, the newly independent states recognize the 
relativism of, and possibilities inherent in, all societies, systems of belief, 
cultural practices. The experience of achieving independence imparts "opti­
mism-the emergence and diffusion of a feeling of hope and power, of the 
belief that what exists does not have to exist, that people can improve their 
lot if they try [and] ... rationalism ... the spread of the presumption that 
planning, organization and the use of scientific knowledge will resolve social 
problems." 51 326 FREED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 MIN AT I 0 N IN THE FUTURE 
( II I ) 
Movements and Mi'grati'ons 
For all its apparent ·power, this new overall pattern of domination, 
developed during an era of mass societies commanded at the top by a 
powerfully centralizing culture and a complex incorporative economy, is 
unstable. As the remarkable French. urban sociologist Paul Virilio has said, 
it is a polity based on speed, instant communication, distant reach, constant 
emergency, insecurity induced by mounting crises, some of which lead to 
war. In such circumstances the rapid occupation of real as well as public 
space--colonization--4>ecomes the central militaristic prerogative of the 
modem state, as the United States showed when it dispatched a huge army 
• to the Arabian Gulf, and commandeered the media to help carty out the 
operation. As against that, Virilio suggests that the modernist project of 
liberating language/speech (Ia liberation de Ia parole) has· a parallel in the 
liberation of critical spaces-hospitals, universities, theaters, factories, 
churches, empty buildings; in both, the fundamental transgressive act is to 
inhabit the normally uninhabited. 52 As examples, Virilio cites the cases of 
people whose current status is the consequence either of decolonization 
(migrant workers, refugees, Gastarbeiter) or of major demographic and politi­
cal shifts (Blacks, immigrants, urban squatters, students, popular insurrec­
tions, etc.). These constitute a real alternative to the authority of the state. 
If the 196os are now remembered as a decade of European and American 
mass demonstrations (the university and anti-war uprisings chief among 
them), the 198os must surely ,be the decade of mass uprisings outside the 
Western metropolis. Iran, the Philippines, Argentina, Korea, Pakistan, Alge­
ria, China, South Africa, virtually all of Eastern Europe, the Israeli-occupied 
territories of Palestine: these are some of the most impressive crowd­
activated sites, each of them crammed with largely unarmed civilian popula­
tions, well past the point of enduring the imposed deprivations, tyranny, and 
in.ftexibility of governments that had ruled them for too long. Most memora­
ble are, on the one hand, the resourcefulness and the stanling symbolism of 
the protests themselves (the stone-throwing Palestinian youths, for example, 
or the swaying dancing South African groups, or the wall-traversing East 
Germans) and, on the other, the offensive brutality or collapse and ignomini­
ous departure of the governments. 
Allowing for great differences in ideology, these mass protests have all Movements and Migrations 
challenged something very basic to every art and theory of government, the 
principle of confinement. To be governed people must be counted, taxed, 
educated, and of course ruled in regulated places (house, school, hospital, 
work site); whose ultimate extension is represented at its most simple and 
severe by the prison or mental hospital, as Michel Foucault argued. True, 
there was a camivalesque aspect to the milling crowds in Gaza or in Wen­
ceslas and Tiananmen squares, but the consequences of sustained mass 
unconfinement and unsettled existence were only a little less dramatic (and 
· dispiriting) in the 198os than before. The unresolved plight of the Palestini­
ans speaks directly of an undomesticated cause and a rebellious people 
paying a very heavy price for their resistance. And there are other examples: 
refugees and "boat people," those unresting and vulnerable itinerants; the 
starving populations of the Southern Hemisphere; the destitute but insistent 
homeless who, like so many Bartlebys, shadow the Christmas shoppers in 
Western cities; the undocumented immigrants and exploited "guest work­
ers" who provide cheap and usually seasonal labor. Between the extremes 
of discontented, challenging urban mobs and the floods of semi-forgotten, 
uncared-for people, the world's secular and religious authorities have sought 
new, or renewed, modes of governance. 
None has seemed so easily available, so conveniently attractive as appeals 
to tradition, national or religious identity, patriotism. And because these 
appeals are amplified and disseminated by a perfected media system ad­
dressing mass cultures, they have been strikingly, not to say frighteningly 
effective. When in the spring of 1986 the Reagan administration decided to 
deal "terrorism" a blow, the raid on Libya was timed to occur exactly as 
~prime-time national evening news began. "America strikes back" was an­
swered resoundingly throughout the Muslim world with bloodcurdling ap­
peals to "Islam," which in tum provoked an avalanche of images, writings, 
and postures in the "West" underscoring the value of"our" Judea-Christian 
(Western, liberal, democratic) heritage and the nefariousness, evil, cruelty, 
and immaturity of theirs (Islamic, Third World, etc.). 
The raid on Libya is instructive not only because of the spectacular 
mirror reflection between the two sides, but also because they both com­
bined righteous authority and retributive violence in a way that was unques­
tioned and then often replicated. Truly this has been the age of Ayatollahs, 
in which a phalanx of guardians (Khomeini, the Pope, Margaret Thatcher) 
simplify and protect one or another creed, essence, primordial faith. One 
fundamentalism invidiously attacks the others in the name of sanity, free­
dom, and goodness. A curious paradox is that religious fervor seems almost 
always to obscure notions of the sacred or divine, as if those could not 
survive in the overheated·, largely secular atmosphere of fundamentalist 328 F R E ED 0 M F R 0 M D 0 MIN AT I 0 N IN THE F U T U R ~ 
combat. You would not think of invoking God's merciful nature when you 
were mobilized by Khomeini (or for that matter, by the Arab champion 
against "the Persians" in the nastiest of the 198os wars, Saddam): you served, 
you fought, you fulminated. Similarly, oversize champions of the Cold War 
like Reagan and Thatcher demanded, with a righteousness and power that 
few clerics could match, obedient service against the Empire of Evil. 
The space between the bashing of other religions or cultures and deeply 
. conservative self-praise has riot been filled with edifying analysis or discus­
sion. In the reams of print about Salman Rushdie's Satanic Verses, only a tiny 
proportion discussed the book itself; those who opposed it and recommended 
its burning and its author's death refused to read it, while those who sup­
ported his freedom to write left it self-righteously at that. Much of the 
passionate controversy about "cultural literacy" in the United States and 
Europe was about what should be read-the twenty or thirty essential 
books--not about how they should be read. In many American universities, 
the frequent right-thinking response to the demands of newly empowered 
marginal groups was to say "show me the African (or Asian, or feminine) 
Proust" or "if you tamper with the canon of Western literature you are likely 
to be promoting the return of polygamy and slavery." Whether or not such 
hauteur and so caricatural a view of historical process were supposed to 
exemplify the humanism and generosity of"our" culture, these sages did not 
volunteer. 
Their assertions joined a mass of other cultural affirmations whose feature 
was that they had been pronounced by experts and professionals. At the 
same time, as often noted on the Left and the Right, the general secular 
intellectual disappeared. The deaths in the 198os of Jean-Paul Sanre, Roland 
Barthes, I. F. Stone, Michel Foucault, Raymond Williams, and C.L.R.James, 
mark the passing of an old order; they had been figures of learning· and 
authority, whose general scope over many fields gave them more than 
professional competence, that is, a critical intellectual style. The techno­
crats, in contrast, as Lyotard says in Postmodern Condition, 53 are principally 
competent to solve local problems, not to ask the big questions set by the 
grand narratives of emancipation and enlightenment, and there are also the 
carefully accredited policy experts who serve the security managers who 
have guided international affairs. 
With the virtual exhaustion of grand systems and total theories (the Cold 
War, the Bretton Woods entente, Soviet and Chinese collectivized econo­
mies, Third World anti-imperialist nationalism), we enter a new period of 
vast uncertainty. This is what Mikhail Gorbachev so powerfully represented 
until he was succeeded by the far less uncertain Boris Y eltsin. Perestroika and 
glasnost, t~e key words associated with Gorbachev's reforms, expressed dis-Movements and Migrations 
satisfaction with the past and, at most, vague hopes about the futur~, but they 
were neither theories nor visions. His restless travels gradually revealed a 
new map of the world, most of it almost frighteningly interdependent, most 
of it intellectually, philosophically, ethnically, and even imaginatively un­
charted. Large masses of people, greater in number and hopes than ever 
before, want to eat better and more frequently; large numbers also want to 
move, talk, sing, dress. If the old systems cannot respond to those demands, 
the gigantic media-hastened images that provoke administered violence and 
·rabid xenophobia will not serve either. They can be counted on to work for 
a moment, but then they lose their mobilizing power. There are too many 
contradictions between reductive schemes and overwhelming impulses and 
drives. 
The old invented histories and traditions and efforts to rule are giving 
way to newer, more elastic and relaxed theories of what is so discrepant and 
intense in the contemporary moment. In the West, post-modernism has seized 
upon the ahistorical weightlessness, consumerism, and spectacle of the new 
order. To it are affiliated other ideas like post-Marxism and post-structural­
ism, varieties of what the Italian philosopher Gianni Vatimo describes as 
"the weak thought" of "the end of modernity." Yet in the Arab and Islamic 
world many artists and intellectuals like Adonis, Elias Khoury, Kamal Abu 
Deeb, Muhammad Arkoun, and Jamal Ben Sheikh are still concerned with 
modernity itself, still far from exhausted, still a major challenge in a culture 
dominated by turath (heritage) and orthodoxy. This is similarly the case in 
the Caribbean, East Europe, Latin America, Africa, and the Indian subconti­
nent; these movements intersect culturally in a fascinating cosmopolitan 
space animated by internationally prominent writers like Salman Rushdie, 
Carl9s Fuentes, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Milan Kundera, who intervene 
forcefully not only as novelists but also as commentators and essayists. And 
their debate over what is modern or post-modern is joined by the anxious, 
urgent question of how we are to modernize, given the cataclysmic upheav­
als the world is experiencing as it moves into the fin de si'ecle, that is, how we 
are going to keep up life itself when the quotidian demands of the present 
threaten to outstrip the human presence? 
The case of Japan is extraordinarily symptomatic, as it is described by the 
Japanese-American intellectual Masao Miyoshi. Remark, he says, that, as 
everyone knows, according to studies of "the enigma of Japanese power," 
Japanese banks, corporations, and real-estate conglomerates now far over­
shadow (indeed dwarf) their American counterparts. Real-estate values in 
Japan are many times higher than in the United States, once considered the 
very citadel of capital. The world's ten largest banks are mostly Japanese, 
and much of the United States' huge foreign debt is held by Japan (and 330 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
Taiwan). Although there was some prefiguring of this in the brief ascen­
dancy of Arab oil-producing states in the 197os,japanese international eco­
nomic power is unparalleled, especially, as Miyoshi says, in being tied to an 
almost total absence of international cultural power. Japan's contemporary 
verbal culture is austere, even impoverished--dominated by talk shows, 
comic books, relentless conferences and panel discussions. Miyoshi diag­
noses a new problematic for culture as a corollary to the country's staggering 
financial resources, an absolute disparity between the total novelty and 
global dominance in the economic sphere, and the impoverishing retreat and 
dependence on the West in cultural discourse. 54 
From the details of daily life to the immense range of global forces 
(including what has been called ''the death of nature")--all these importune 
the troubled soul, and there is little to mitigate their power or the crises they 
create. The two general areas of agreement nearly everywhere are that 
personal freedoms should be safeguarded, and that the earth's environment 
should be defended against further decline. Democracy and ecology, each 
providing a local context and plenty of concrete combat zones, are set 
against a cosmic backdrop. Whether in the struggle of nationalities or in the 
problems of deforestation and global warming, the interactions between 
individual identity (embodied in minor activities like smoking or using of 
aerosol cans) and the general framework are tremendously direct, and the 
time-honored conventions of art, history, and philosophy do not seem well­
suited to them. Much of what was so exciting for four decades about 
Western modernism and its aftermath-in, say, the elaborate interpretative 
strategies of critical theory or the self-consciousness of literary and musical 
forms-seems almost quaintly abstract, desperately Eurocentric today. 
More reliable now are the reportS from the front line where struggles are 
being fought between domestic tyrants and idealist oppositions, hybrid 
combinations of realism and fantasy, cartographic and archeological descrip­
tions, explorations in mixed forms (essay, video or film, photograph, memoir, 
story, aphorism) of unhoused exilic experiences. 
The major task, then, is to match the new economic and socio-political 
dislocations and configurations of our time with the startling realities of 
human interdependence on a world scale. If the Japanese, East European, 
Islamic, and Western instances express anything in common, it is that a new 
critical consciousness is needed, and this can be achieved only by revised 
attitudes to education. Merely to urge students to insist on one's own 
identity, history, tradition, uniqueness may initially get th~m to name their 
basic requirements for democracy and for the right to an assured, decently 
humane existence. But we need to go on and to situate these in a geography 
of other identities, peoples, cultures, and then to study how, despite their MO'Vetnents and M igration.r 
differences, they have always overlapped one another, through unhierarch­
ical intluence, crossing, incorporation, recollection, deliberate forgetfulness, 
and, of course, contlict. We are nowhere near "the end of history," but we 
are still far from free from monopolizing attitudes toward it. These have not 
been much good in the past-notwithstanding the rallying cries of the 
politics of separatist identity, multiculturalism, minority discourse--and the 
quicker we teach ourselves to find alternatives, the better and safer. The fact 
is, we are mixed in with one another in ways that most national systems of 
education have not dreamed o£ To match knowledge in the arts and 
sciences with these integrative realities is, I believe, the intellectual and 
cultural challenge .of moment. 
The steady critique of nationalism, which derives from the various theo­
rists of liberation I have discussed, should not be forgotten, for we must not 
condemn ourselves to repeat the imperial experienc.e. In the redefined and 
yet very close contemporary relationship between culture and imperialism, 
a relationship that enables disquieting forms of domination, how can we 
sustain the liberating energies released by the great decolonizing resistance 
movements and the mass uprisings of the 198os? Can these energies elude the 
homogenizing processes of modern life, hold in abeyance the interventions 
of the new imperial centrality? 
"All things counter, original, spare, strange": Gerard Manley Hopkins in 
"Pied Beauty." The question is, Where! And where too, we might ask, is there 
a place for that astonishingly harmonious vision of time intersecting with the 
timeless that occurs at the end of"Little Gidding," a moment that Eliot saw 
as words in 
An easy rommerce of the old anti the new, 
The common word exact without vulgarity, 
The formal word precite but not pedantic, 
The complete contort dancing together.S! 
Virilio's notion is counter-habitation: to live as migrants do in habitually 
uninhabited but nevertheless public spaces. A similar notion occurs in Mille 
Plateaux (volume z of the Anti-Oedipe) by Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. 
A great deal of this immensely rich book is not easily accessible, but I have 
found it mysteriously suggestive. The chapter entitled "Traite de 
nomadologie: La Machine de guerre," builds on Virilio's work by extending 
his ideas on movement and space to a highly eccentric study of an itinerant 
war machine. This quite original treatise contains a metaphor about a 
disciplined kind of intellectual mobility in an age of institutionalization, 
regimentation, co-optation. The war machine, Deleuze and Guattari say, 332 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
can be assimilated ·to the military powers of the state-but, since it is 
fundamentally a separate entity, need not be, any more than the spirit's 
nomadic wanderings need always be put at the service of institutions. The 
war machine's source of strength is not only its nomadic freedom but also 
its metallurgical an-which Deleuze and Guattari compare to the an of 
musical composition-by which materials are forged, fashioned "beyond 
separate forms; [this metallurgy, like music] stresses the continuing develop­
ment ofform itself, and beyond individually differing materials it stresses the 
continuing variation within matter itsel£"s 6 Precision, concreteness, conti­
nuity, form-all these have the attributes of a nomadic practice whose 
power, Virilio says, is not aggressive but transgressive.s' 
We can perceive this truth on the political map of the contemporary 
world. For surely it is ~ne of the unhappiest characteristics of the age to have 
produced more refugees, migrants, displaced persons, and exiles than ever 
before in history, most of them as an accompaniment to and, ironically 
enough, as aftenhoughts of great post-colonial and imperial conflicts. As the 
struggle for independence produced new states and new boundaries, it also 
produced homeless wanderers, nomads, and vagrants, unassimilated to the 
emerging structures of institutional power, rejected by the established order 
for their intransigence and obdurate rebelliousness. And insofar as these 
people exist between the old and.the new, between the old empire and the 
new state, their condition articulates the tensions, irresolutions, and con­
tradictions in the overlapping territories shown on the cultural map of 
imperialism. 
There is a great difference, however, between the optimistic mobility, the 
intellectual liveliness, and "the logic of daring" described by the various 
theoreticians on whose work I have drawn, and the massive dislocations, 
waste, misery, and horrors endured in our.century's migrations and muti­
lated lives. Yet it is no exaggeration to say that liberation as an intellecrual 
mission, born in the resistance and opposition to the confinements and 
ravages of imperialism, has now shifted from the settled, established, and 
domesticated dynamics of culture to its unhoused, decentered, and exilic 
energies, energies whose incarnation today is the migrant, and whose con­
sciousness is that of the intellectual and artist in exile, the political figure · 
between domains, between forms, between homes, and between languages. 
From this perspective then all things are indeed counter, original, spare, 
strange. From this perspective also, one can see "the complete consort 
dancing together" contrapuntally. And while it would be the rankest Pan­
glossian dishonesty to say that the bravura performances of the intellectual 
exile and the miseries of the displaced person or refugee are the same, it is 
possible, I think, to regard the intellectual as first distilling then aniculating Movements and Migrations 333 
the predicaments that disfigure modernity-mass deportation, imprison­
ment, population transfer, collective dispossession, and forced immigrations. 
"The past life of emigres is, as we know, annulled,'' says Adorno in 
Minima Mtmdia, subtitled Reflections from a Damaged Life (Rejlexionen aus dem 
beschiidigten Leben). Why? "Because anything that is not reified, cannot be 
counted and measured, ceases to exist'' 58 or, as he says later, is consigned to 
mere "background." Although the disabling aspects of this fate are manifest, 
its virtues or possibilities are worth exploring. Thus the emigre conscious­
ness--a mind of winter, in Wallace Stevens's phrase---discovers in its mar­
ginality that "a gaze averted lirom the beaten track, a hatred of brutality, a 
search for fresh concepts not yet encompassed by the general pattern, is the 
last hope for thought." 59 Adorno's general pattern is what in another place 
he calls the "administered world" or, insofar as the irresistible dominants in 
culture are concerned, "the consciousness industry." There is then not just 
the negative advantage of refuge in the emigre's eccentricity; there is also 
the positive benefit of challenging the system, describing it in language 
unavailable to those it has already subdued: 
In an intellectual hierarchy which constantly makes everyone answera­
ble, unanswerability alone can call the hierarchy directly by its name. 
The circulation sphere, whose stigmata are borne by intellectual out­
siders, opens a last refuge to the mind that it barters away, at the very 
moment when refuge no longer exists. He who offers for sale something 
unique that no one wants to buy, represents, even against his will, 
freedom from exchange. 60 
These are certainly minimal opportunities, although a few pages later 
Adorno expands the possibility of freedom by prescribing a form of expres­
sion whose opacity, obscurity, and deviousness--the absence of "the full 
transparency of its logical genesis"-rnove away from the dominant system, 
enacting in its "inadequacy" a measure of liberation: 
This inadequacy resembles that of life, which describes a wavering, 
deviating line, disappointing by comparison with its premises, and yet 
which only in this actual course, always less than it should be, is able, 
under given conditions of existence, to represent an unregimented 
one.61 
Too privatized, we are likely to say about this respite from regimentation. 
Yet we can rediscover it not only in the obdurately subjective, even negative 
Adorno, but in the public accents of an Islamic intellectual like Ali Shariati, 334 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
a prime force in the early days of the Iranian Revolution, when his attack 
on "the true, straight path, this smooth and sacred highway"-organized 
onhodoxy-contrasted with the deviations of constant migration: 
man, this dialectical phenomenon, is compelled to be always in mo­
tion .... Man, then, can never attain a final resting place and take up 
residence in God .... How disgraceful, then, are all fixed standards. 
Who can ever fix a standard? Man is a "choice," a struggle, a constant. 
becoming. He is an infinite migration, a migration within himself, from 
clay to God; he is a migrant within his own soul.62 
Here we have a genu~ne potential for an emergent non-coercive culture 
(although Shariari speaks only of"man" and not of"woman"), which in its 
awareness of concrete obstacles and concrete steps, exactness without vul­
garity, precision but not pedantry, shares the sense of a beginning which 
occurs in all genuinely radical etforts to start again63-for example, the 
tentative authorization of feminine experience in Virginia Woolf's A Room 
of One's O'!Im, or the fabulous reordinarion of rime and character giving rise 
to the divjded generations of Midnight's Children, or the remarkable univer­
salizing of the African-American experience as it emerges in such brilliant 
detail in Toni Morrison's Tar Baby and Beloved. The push or tension comes 
from the surrounding environment-the imperialist power that would 
otherwise compel you to disappear or to accept some miniature version of 
yourself as a doctrine to be passed out on a course syllabus. These are not 
new master discourses, strong new narratives, but, as in John Berger's pro­
gram, another way of telling. When photographs or texts are used merely to 
establish identity and presence-to give us merely representative images of 
the Woman, or the Indian-they enter what Berger calls a control system. 
With their innately ambiguous, hence negative and anti-narrativist way­
wardness not denied, however, they permit unregimented subjectivity to 
have a social function: "fragile images (family photographs] often carried 
next to the bean, or placed by the side of the bed, are used to refer to that 
which historical time has no right to destroy." 64 
From another perspective, the exilic, the marginal, subjective, migratory 
energies of modern life, which the liberationist struggles have deployed. 
when these energies are too toughly resilient to disappear, have also 
emerged in what Immanuel Wallerstein calls "anti-systemic movements." 
Remember that the main feature of imperialist expansion historically was 
accumulation, a process that accelerated during the twentieth century. Wal­
lerstein's argument is that at bottom capital accumulation is irrational; its 
additive, acquisitive gains continue unchecked even though its costs--in Movements and Migrations 335 
maintaining the process. in paying for wars to protect it, in "buying off" and 
co-opting "intermediate cadres," in living in an atmosphere of permanent 
crisis--are exorbitant, not worth the gains. Thus, Wallerstein says, "the very 
superstructure [of state power and the national cultures that support the idea 
of st~te power] that was put in place to maximize the free flow of the factors 
of production in the world-economy is the nursery of national movements 
that mobilize against the inequalities inherent in the world system." 6s Those 
people compelled by the system to play subordinate or imprisoning roles 
within it emerge as conscious antagonists, disrupting it, proposing claims, 
advancing arguments that dispute the totalitarian compulsions of the world 
market. Not everything can be bought off. 
All these hybrid counter-energies, at work in many fields, individuals, and 
moments provide a community or culture made up of numerous anti­
systemic hints and practices for collective human existence (and neither 
doctrines nor complete theories) that is not based on coercion or domi­
nation. They fuelled the uprisings of the 198os, about which I spoke earlier. 
The authoritative, compelling image of the empire, which crept into and 
overtook so many procedures of intelleetual mastery that are central in 
modern culture, finds its opposite in the renewable, almost sporty discon­
tinuities of intellectual and secular impurities--mixed genres, unexpected 
combinations of tradition and novelty, political experiences based on com-
. munities of effort and interpretation (in the broadest sense of the word) 
father than classes or corporations of possession, appropriation, and power. 
I find myself returning again and again to a hauntingly beautiful passage 
by Hugo of St. Victor, a twelfth-century monk from Saxony: 
It is therefore, a source of great virtue for the practiced mind to learn, 
bit by bit, first to change about in visible and transitory things, so that 
afterwards it may be able to leave them behind altogether. The person. 
who finds his homeland sweet is still a tender beginner; he to whom 
every soil is as his native one is already strong; but he is perfect to 
whom the entire world is as a foreign place. The tender soul has fixed 
his love on one spot in the world; the strong person has extended his 
love to all places; the perfect man has extinguished his.66 
Erich Auerbach, the great German scholar who spent the years of World 
War Two as an exile in Turkey, cites this passage as a model for anyone­
man and woman-wishing to transcend the restraints of imperial or national 
or provincial limits. Only through this attitude can a historian, for example, 
begin to grasp human experience and its written records in all their diversity 
and particularity; otherwise· one would remain committed more to the 336 FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
exclusions and reactions of prejudice than to the negative freedom of real 
knowledge. But note that Hugo twice makes it clear that the "strong" or 
"perfect" person achieves independence and detachment by -wOrking through 
attachments, not by rejecting them. Exile is predicated on the existence of, 
love for, and a real bond with one's native place; the universal truth of exile 
is not that one has lost that love or home, but that inherent in each is an 
unexpected, unwelcome loss. Regard experiences then at if they were about 
to disappear: what is it about them that anchors or roots them in reality? 
What would you save ef them, what would you give up, what would you 
recover? To answer such questions you must have the independence and 
detachment of someone whose homeland is "sweet," but whose actual condi­
tion makes it impossible to recapture that sweetness, and even less possible 
to derive satisfaction from substitutes furnished by illusion or dogma, 
whether deriving from pride in one's heritage or from certainty about who 
"we" are. 
No one today is purely one thing. Labels like Indian, or woman, or 
Muslim, or American are not more than starting-points, which if followed 
into actual experience for only a moment are quickly left behind. Imperial­
ism consolidated the mixture of cultures and identities on a global scale. But 
its worst and most paradoxical gift was to allow people to believe that they 
were only, mainly, exclusively, white, or Black, or Western, or Oriental. Yet 
just as human beings make their own history, they also make their cultures 
and ethnic identities. No one can deny the persisting continuities of long 
traditions, sustained habitations, national languages, and cultural geogra­
phies, but there seems no reason except fear and prejudice to keep insisting 
on their separation and distinctiveness, as if that was all human life was 
about. Survival in fact is about the connections between things; in Eliot's 
phrase, reality cannot be deprived of the "other echoes [that] inhabit the 
garden." It is more rewarding-and more difficult-to think concretely and 
sympathetically, contrapuntally, about others than only about "us." But this 
also means not trying to rule others, not trying to classify them or put them 
in hierarchies, above all, not constantly reiterating how "our" culture or 
country is number one (or not number one, for that matter). For the intellec, 
mal there is quite enough of value to do without that. Notes 
INTRODUCTION 
1. Roben Hughes, The Falfll Sho": The Epic of Aurtralilli Founding (New York: Knopf, 1!)87 ), 
p. r86. 
1. Paul Caner, The Road to Botany BII.J: An Exploration of Landscape and History (New York: 
Knopf, 1988), pp. 101~. As a supplement to Hughes and Caner, see Sneja Gunew, "Denatu­
ralizing Cultural Nationalisms: Multicultural Readings of' Australia,' " in Nation and Narra­
tUm, ed. Homi K. Bhabha (London: Routledge, 1990), pp. 99"""110. 
3· Joseph Conrad, Nostromo: A Tale of the Sealfoard (1904; rpn. Garden City: Doubleday, 
Page, 191.f), p. 77· Strangely, Tan Watt, one of Conrad's best critics, has next to naming to say 
about United States imperialism in Nostromo: see his Conrad: "Nostromo" (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1988). Some suggestive insights into.the relationship between geogta-
' phy, trade, and fetishism are found in David Simpson, Fetishism and Tmagination: Diclzens, 
Melville, Conrad (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981), pp. 93-116. 
+ Lila Abu-Lughod, Veiled Sentiments: Honor and Poetry in a Bedouin Society (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1987); Leila Ahmed, Women and Gender in fslam: Historical Roots 
of a Modem Debate (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991); Fedwa Malti-Douglas, Womani 
Body, Womani World: Gender and Discourse in Arabo-Islamic Writing (Princeton: Princeton Uni­
versity Press, 1991) . 
.f· Sara Suleri, The Rhetoric of English India (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991); 
Lisa Lowe, Critical Terrains: French and British Orienta/isms (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 
1991). 
6. Artiiur M. Schlesinger, Jr., The Disuniting of America: R~ections on a Multicultural Society 
(New York: Whittle Communications, 1991). 
CHAPTER ONE 
OVERLAPPING TERRITORIES, INTERTWINED HISTORIES 
1. T. S. Eliot, Critical &says (London: Faber & Faber, 1931), pp. 14-l.f. 
1. See Lyndall Gordon, Eliot's Ear{y Years (Oxford and New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1977 ), pp. 49"'"H· 
3· C. C. Eldridge, Englandi Mission: The Imperial TJea in the Age of Gladstone and Disraeli, 
r81f6-r88o (Chapel Hill: University of Nonh Carolina Press, 1974). 
+ Patrick O'Brien, "The Costs and Benefits of British Imperialism," Pt~~tand Present, No. 
110, 1988. Notes 
5· Lance E. Davis and Robert A. Huttenback, Mennmon anti the Ptmuit of Empirr: The 
Political EmwmyofBritirh lmperialirm,r8Do-1J12o (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986). 
6. See William Roger Louis, ed., lmperialirm: The Robinron.anti Gallagher CtmiTIJversy (New 
York: New Viewpoints, 1976). 
7· For example, Andre Gunder Frank, Dependent Acrumulation and Underdevelopment (New 
York: Monthly Review, 1979), and Samir Amin, L'Arcumulation a l'echelk montiillk (Paris: 
Anthropos, 1970 ). 
8. O'Brien, "Cosu and Benefits," pp. 18o-81. 
9· Harry Magdolf, lmperialirm: From the Cobmial Age hi the Pment (New York: Monthly 
Review, 1978), pp. 19 and 35· 
10. William H. McNeill, The Pursuit of Power. Tet:hnoloo. Armed Fones anti Sot:iety Since Jo/10 
A.D. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), pp. z6o-61. 
n. V. G. Kiernan, Marxism anti lmperilllirm (New York: SL Martin's Press, 1974), p. m. 
11. Richard W. Van Alstyne, The Ruing American Empirr (New York: Norton, 1974), p. 1. 
See also Walrer LaFeber, The Nt'W Empire: An lntnprellltitm of American ExjJIInrion (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1963). 
13-See Michael H. Hunt, /Jeoloo and US Foreip Polity (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1987 ). 
14 Michael W. Doyle, Empires (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986), p. 45· 
15. David Landes, The Unbounti Prometheus: Technolt.gical Change atitl Industrial Dewlopment 
in Wmern Europe from f7JO hi the Present (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969), p. 37· 
16. Tony Smith, The Pllltml of lmperialirm: The United St~ms, Great Britain, and the Lflk 
lntiuslriillizing World Since 18r.J (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), p. 51. Smith 
quores Gandhi on this poinL 
17. Kiernan, Marxirm anti lmperialirm, p. 111. 
18. D. K.· Fieldhouse, The Colonial Empires: A Comparative Survey from the Eighteenth Centrlry 
(1965; rprL Houndmills: Macmillan, 1991), p. 103. 
19. Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the EtJrth, trans. Constance Farrington (1961; rprL New 
York: Grove, 1968), p. 1o1. 
zo. J. A. Hobson, Imperialism: A Study (1902; rprt Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1972 ), P· '97· 
21. Srlected Poetry anti Prose of Blake, ed. Northrop Frye (New York: Random House, 1953), 
p. 447· One of the few works to deal with Blake's anti-imperialism is David V. Erdman, Blake: 
Prophet Against Empire (New York: Dover, 1991). 
n. Charles Dickens, Dombey tJnti Son (1848; rprt. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 197o), p. so. 
13. Raymond Williams, "Introduction," in Dickens, Dombey ~nd Son, pp. n-11. 
14 Martin Bernal, Black Athena: The Afroasilltic Roots uf Classical Civilizt~tion, Vol. 1 (New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1987), pp. z8~336. 
ZJ. Bernard S. Cohn, "Representing Authority in Victorian lndii," in Eric Hobsbawm 
and Terence Ranger, eds., The Invention ofTrtJdition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1983), pp. 18)ZD7· 
z6. Qy.oted in Philip D. Currin, ed., Imperialism (New York: Walker, 1971), pp. Z94""'95· 
17. Salman Rushdie, "Outside the Whale," in Imaginary Homelands: Essays anti Criticism, 
Ip8z-IJI9I (London: Viking/Granra, 1991), pp. 91, 1o1. 
z8. This is the message of Conor Cruise O'Brien's "Why the Wailing Ought to Stop," 
The Olwrver. June 3, 1984 
19. Joseph Conrad, "Heart of Darkness," in Youth and Tw Other Stones (Garden City: 
Doubleday, Page, I9ZJ), p. 81. 
3o. For Mackinder, see Neil Smith, UMVen Development: Natr~re, Capiraland the Pruducfio, 
of SjJIIee (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984), pp. 101-3-Conrad and triumphalist geography are at the Notes 339 
hearr of Felix Driver, "Geography's Empire: Hisrories of Geographical Knowledge," So&iety 
and Sj!/1«, 1991. 
3L Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Toltllilllrianism (1951; new ed. New York: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1973), p.115. See also Fredric Jameson, The Political Umomt:Utus: Narrative at 
11 Socially Symbolic Act (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 15181), pp. 1o6-8L 
31. Jean-Fran~ois Lyotard, The PDStmodem Condititm: A Report on KIUJ'I»k4u. trans. Geoff' 
Bennington and Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984), p. 37· 
33· See especially Foucault's late work, The Care of the Self, trans. Robert Hurley (New 
York: Pantheon, 1986). A bold new interpretation arguing that Foucault's entire Dt:rlvre is about 
the self, and his in particular, is advanced in The Parsion of Michel Foucault by James Miller 
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993). 
34· See, for example, G~rard Chaliand, RevolutUHI in the Third World (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin, 1978). 
35· Rushdie, "Outside the Whale," pp. 1oo-1o1. 
36. Ian Watt, Conrad in the Ninetemth Century (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1979 ), pp. l7 5"19· 
37· Eric Hobsbawm, "Introduction," in Hobsbawm and Ranger, Invention a/Tradition, p. 1. 
38. Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Fourier, Prlfoce historique, Vol. 1 of Dercription de I'Egypte (Paris: 
lmprimerie royale, 18osr18z8), p. 1. · 
39· 'Abd al-Rahman al-:Jabarri, iijA'ib ai-Athar ft ai-Tarajum waai-Akhbar, Vol. 4 (Cairo: 
Lajnat al-Bayan al-'Arabi, 1958-1967), p. 184 
40. See Christopher Miller, Blank Darkness: Africanist Dircouru in French (Chicago: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press, 1985), and Arnold Temu and Bonaventure Swai, Hirtoriam and 
Africanirt History: A Critique (Westport Lawrence Hill, 1981). 
41. Johannes Fabian, Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1983); Tala! Asad, ed., Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter 
(London: Ithaca Press, 1975); Brian S. Turner, Marx and the End ofOrientfliism (London: Allen 
& Unwin, 1978). For a discussion of some of these works, see Edward W. Said, "Orientalism 
Reconsidered,"' RIIGe and Class 17, No. 1 (Autumn 15185), 1-15-
42. Peter Gran, The lrlamic Roots ofCapilillism: Egypt,I7d"o-r.1'4o(Austin: University ofTexas 
Press, 1979);Judith Tucker, Women in Nineteenth Century Egypt (Cairo: American University in 
Cairo Press, 15186); Hanna Bataru, The Old Social Classrs and the Revolutionary Movements of lmq 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978); Syed Hussein Alatas, The Myth of tb~ Lazy 
Ntllive: A Study of the Image of the Malays, Filipinos, and JaVIInese from the Sixteenth to the Twmtietb 
Cmtury and Its FunciUm in the ldetJioo of Colonial Capitalirm (London: Frank Cass, 1977). 
43· Gauri Viswanathan, The Mash of Conquest: Literary Study and British Rllk ;, lt~dia (New 
York: Columbia Unive~sity Press, 1989). 
44 Francis Fergusson, The Human Image in Dnnnatic Literature (New York: Doubleday, 
Anchor, 1957) pp. zo_r-6. 
45· Erich Auerbach, "Philology and Wdditen~tur." trans. M. and E. W. Said, Centennial 
Review 13 (Winter 1969 ); see my discussion of this work in The World, the Texr. and the Critic 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1983), pp. 1-9. 
46. George E .. Woodberry, "Editorial" (1903), in Comparative Liten~ture: The Early YearT, An 
Antholoo of Essays, eds. HansJo~chim Schulz and Phillip K. Rein (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina Press, 1973), p. 111. See also Harry Levin, Grounds for Comparisotl (Cambridge, 
Mass~ Harvard University Press, 1971), pp. J'ri3o; Claudio Guillern, Entre lo uno y lo divmo: 
lt11Toducci4n alflliten~tttra comparada (Barcelona: Editorial Cririca, 1985), pp. 54-111. 
47· Erich Auerbach, Mimesir: The Representation of Reality in Western Liten~ture, trans. 
Willard Trask (Princeton: Princeton ·University Press, 1953). See also Said, "Secular Criti-
cism," in The World, the Text, and the Critic, pp. y-53 and 148--49. . Notes 
411· . The National Defense Education Act (NDEA). An act of the United States Congress 
passed in 1958, it authorized the expenditure of $195 million for science and languages, both 
deemed important for national security. Departments of Comparative Literature were among 
the beneficiaries of this act. 
49· Cited in Smith, Uneven Development, pp. 101--1. 
50. Antonio Gramsci, "Some Aspects of the Southern Qpestion," in Selectians frrnn Political 
Writing, 1~21-I~~ trans. and ed. Qpintin Hoare (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1978), p. 461. 
For an unusual application ofGramsci's theories about "Southernism," see Timothy Brennan, 
"Literary Criticism and the Southern Qpestion,'' Cultural Critique, No. n (Winter 1~1H19), 
89"'"114 
51. John Stuart Mill, Principles of Politi&al Economy, Vol. 3. ed. J. M. Robson (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 1965), p. 693· 
CHAPTER TWO 
CONSOLIDATED VISION 
1. Richard Slatkin, Regeneration Through Violence: The Mythology of the American Frontier, 
Ilfo()-I81fo (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 1973); Patricia Nelson Limerick, The 
Lega&J of Conquest: The Un!Jrolzen Past of the American West (New York: Norton, 1988); Michael 
Paul Ragin, Fathers and Chi/Jren: Andrew JaclzJon and the Subjugation of the American Indian (New 
York: Knopf, 1975). 
1. Bruce Robbins, The Servant's Hand: EntJish Fiction frrnn Below (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1986). 
3· Gareth Stedman Jones, Outcast London: A Study in the Relationship Bet'Wml the Classes in 
Victorian Society (1971; rprt. New York: Pantheon, 1~4). 
4· Eric Wolf, Europe and the People Without History (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1~1). 
5· Martin Green, Dreams of Adventure, Deeds of Empire (New York: Basic Books, 1979); 
Molly Mahood, The CokJnial Encounter: A Reading of Six Novels (London: Rex Collings, 1977 ); 
John A. McClure, Kipling and Conrad: The CokJnial Fiction (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univer­
sity Press, 1981); Patrick Brandinger, The Rule of Darlzness: British LitmJture and Imperialism, 
I8J()-I~I4 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1~8). See also John Barrell, The InfectUm of Thomas 
de Qgincey: A Psycbopatbolop;J of Imperialism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991). 
6. William Appleman Williams, Empire as a Way of Life (New York and Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1980 ), pp. 111-13. · 
7· Jonah Raskin, The MytbokJD of Imperialism (New York: Random House, 1971); Gordon 
K. Lewis, Slavery, Imperialism, and Freedom: Studies in English Radical Thought (New York: 
Monthly Review, 1978); V. G. Kiernan, The Lords of Human Kind: Black Man, Y elluw Man, and 
White Man in an Age of Empire (1969; rprt. New York: Columbia University Press, 1986), and 
Marxism and Imperialism (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1974). A more recent work is Eric 
Cheyfirz, The Poeti&S of Imperialism: Translation and CokJnization from The Tempest to Tarzan 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1991). Benita Parry, Conrad and ImP,erialism (London: 
Macmillan, 1983), cogently discusses these and other ·works in the context provided by 
Conrad's fiction. 
8. E. M. Forster, HIJ'IDIJrds End (New York: Knopf, 1911), p. 104. 
9· Raymond Williams, Politi&s and Letters: lnterviii'Ws 'With NII'W Left Revii!'W (London: New 
Left, 1979), p. n8. 
10. Williams's Culture and Society, I'J8()-J~o, was published in 1958 (London: Chatto & 
Windus). · Notes 
n. Joseph Conrad, "Hean of Darkness," in Youth 11nd T'WD Other Stori~s (Garden City: 
Doubleday, Page, 1915), pp. 5o-51. For a demystifying account of the connection between 
modern culture and redemption, see Leo Bersani, T~ Culture of Redemption (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 199o). 
11. Theories and justifications of imperial style--ancient versus modem, English versus 
French, and so on-were in plentiful supply after 188o. See as a celebrated example Evelyn 
Baring (Cromer), Andmt 11nd Modern Imperialism (London: Murray, 1910). See also C. A. 
Bodelsen, Studies in Mid-Victori11n lmpmalinn (New York: Howard Fettig, 1968), and Richard 
Faber, T~ Vision 11nd the Need: Lllfe Victori~~n Imperialist Aims (London: Faber & Faber, 1966). 
An earlier but still useful work is Klaus Knorr, British Colonial Theories (Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press, 1944). 
13. Ian Watt, T« Ris~ oft~ Novel (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1957 ); Lennard 
Davis, FIICIUIII Fictions: T« Origins of the English Nowl (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1983); John Richetti, Popular Fiction Before Richardson (London: Oxford University Press, 1969 ); 
Michael McKeon, T« Origin oft~ English Nowl, Ilfoo-l'J40 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univer­
sity Press, 1987 ). 
14-J. R. Seeley, The Erp11nsion ofEnt}llnd (1884; rprt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1971), p. 11;). A. Hobson, lmpmmi.rm: A Study (19o1; rpn. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 1971), p. IJ. Although Hobson implicates other European powers in the perversions of 
imperialism, England stands out. 
IJ. Raymond Williams, T« Counb;J 11nd t« City (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1973), pp. 165--81 and passim. 
16. D.C.M. Platt, Fin~~nce, Trade 11nd Politics in British Foreign Policy, I8IJI§J4 (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1968), p. 536. 
17. Ibid., p. 357· 
18. Joseph Schumpeter, lmpmali.rm 11nd Social Classes, trans. Heinz Norden (New York: 
Augustus M. Kelley, 1951), p. 1z. 
19. Platt, Fin~~nce, Tr11d~ 11nd Politics, p. 359· 
10. Ronald Robinson and John Gallagher, with Alice Denny, A[ric1111nd t« Victori11ns: T« 
Ojficilll Mind of lmperilllinn (1961; new ed. London: Macmillan, 1981), p. 10. But for a vivid sense 
of what effects this thesis has had in scholarly discussion of empire, see William Roger Louis, 
ed., lmpmllli.rm: T« Robinson and Gallagher Conmrversy (New York: Franklin Watts, 1976). An 
essential compilation for the whole field of study is Robin Winks, ed., T« Hirtoriogr11phy of 
the British Empire-Commonw~11lth: Trends,/ntetpreflltions,llnd Resources (Durham: Duke University 
Press, 1966). Two compilations mentioned by Winks (p. 6) are Historit~nt of lndi11, P11kirflm ~~nd 
Ceylon, ed. Cyril H. Philips, and Historians of South Etut Asi11, ed. D.G.E. Hall. 
z1. Fredric Jameson, T« Political Unconscious: N11rrllfive 111 11 Socially Symbolic Act (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1981); David A. Miller, T« Nowl 11nd t« Police (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1988). See also Hugh Ridley, lm11ges oflmperi111 Rule (London: Croom Helm, 
1983~· 
11. In John MacKenzie, Propllgand1111nd Empire: T« M11nipullltion of British Public Opinion, 
I88o-1¢o (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1984), there is an excellent account of 
how popular culture was effective in the official age of empire. See also MacKenzie, ed., 
Imperialism 11nd Popular Culture (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1986); for more 
subtle manipulations of the English national identity during the same period, see Robert Colis 
and Philip Dodd~ eds., Ent)isbnm: Politics 11nd Culture, I88o-IJIZO (London: Croom Helm, 1987). 
See also Raphael Samuel, ed., P11trioti.rm: T~ M11king ~~nd Un11111king of British Ntltionlllldmtily, 
3 vols. (London: Routledge, 1989). 
z3. E.M. Forster, A Puss11geto/ndi11(1914; rprt. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1951), 
p. 131. Notes 
14-For the attack on Conrad, see Chinua Achebe, "An Image of Africa: Racism in 
Conrad's Heart of Dartnerr," in Hupn anti lmpetlimmtr: Sdet:tetl Errayr (New York: Doubleday, 
Anchor, 1989), pp. 1-1o. Some of the issues raised by Achebe are well discussed by Brantlinger, 
Rule of Daliners, pp. 169-74. 
1J. Deirdre David, Fictionr ofReso/utiDII ;, Tb"'l'ittoria11 Novelr (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1981). 
16. Georg Lukacs, The Histurital Navel, trans. Hannah and Stanley Mitchell (London: 
Merlin Press, 1961), pp. 1~. 
17. Jbitl., pp. 3o-63. 
18. A few lines from Ruskin are quoted and commented on in R. Koebner and H. 
Schmidt, lmpm'alirm: The Slor] """ Signijic1111ct of 11 Political Worltl, r&fo-rltflf (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1964), p. 99· 
19. V. G. Kiernan, Marxirm 1111tl lmperilllirm (New York: St. Marrin's Press, 1974), p. 100. 
30. John Stuart Mill, DirquiritiDN """ Diteurriolfr, Vol. 3 (London: Longmans, Green, 
Reader & Dyer, 187s), pp. 16,-68. For an earlier version of this see the discussion by Nicholas 
Canny, "The Ideology of English Colonization: From Ireland to America," Willi11111 anti Mill] 
QJ!arrmy 30 (1973), nns: · 
. 31. Williams, Cou1111y anti tbe City, p. 181. 
31. Peter Hulme, Cokmilll E~~&oUiflers: Europe anti the Native CMibbea11, J4P7rJ7.PJ (London: 
Methuen, 1986). See also his anthology with Neil L. Whitehead, Wiltl Majeny: Elf&ou11tm wilb 
Caribs: frrnn Columbus: to fhe Pmmt Day (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991). 
33· Hobson, Jmperilllirm, p. 6. 
34· This is most memorably discussed in C.L.R. James's The Blatk J"obi11r: TotUsaint 
L 'OIIW71Ure anti the S1111 Doltli11go Rewluti011 (1938; rprt. New York: Vintage, 1963), especially 
Chapter 1, "The Owners." See also Robin Blackburn, The Ovmlmn» of Cokmial Slavery, 
I77I-II48 (London: Verso, 1988), pp. 14SJ-S3· 
3J· Williams, Cotml1y anti the City, p. 117. 
36. Jane Austen, M11nsjieJJ Park, ed. Tony Tanner (1814; rprt Harmondsworth: Penguin, 
1966), p. 41. The best account of the novel is in Tony Tanner's Ja~~e Aurtm (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1986). 
rl· /bit/., p. J+ 
38. /bill., p. 1o6. 
39• Warren Roberts, Ja~~e Aurtm anti the Fmu:b Revol11tion (London: Macmillan, 1979), 
pp. 97-98. See also Avrom Fleishman, A ReatlingofMansfield Park: An Erray in Crititlll Synthesis: 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1967), pp. 36-39 and parrim. 
40. Austen, MansjieJJ Park, pp. 37s-76. 
41. John .Stuart Mill, Pn'ndpkr of Politielll EtiJIIlmiY, Vol. 3, ed. J. M. Robson (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 196;), p. ~3· The passage is quoted in Sidney W. Mintz, S'Wfflllers 
anti PO'IHT: The \>~atl' of Sugar;, Mot/em History (New York: Viking, 198;), p. 42. 
41. Austen, Mansfieltl Park, p. 446. 
43· IIJitl., P· 448. 
4'f-/IJjJ., p. 4j'D. 
4J· lbitl., p. 4J6. 
46. John Gallagher, The Detli~~e, Revival11ntl Fall of the Britirb Empirr (Cambridge: Cam· 
bridge University Press, 1981), p. 76. 
47· Austen, MaMjieJJ Pan, p. 308. 
f8. Lowell Joseph Ragatz, The Fall of the Planter Clars in tbe British Carillberm, J7IJ-I81J: A 
Study in S~~t:illlantl Eto~~omic Hirlor] (1918; rprt. New York: Octagon, 1963), p. 17. 
49· Eric Williams, Capitlllirm anti Slavery (New York: Russell & Russel~ 1961), p. 111. See Notes 343 
also his From Columbtu to C111tro: The History oftlx Caribbean, 14J:z-IJIJI (London: Deutsch, 1970 ), 
pp. 17/154-
JO. Austen, Mansfttltl Park, p. 213. 
51. Tzvetan Todorov, Notu et les aums: Lll rtjlexirm sur Ia diversiJe btlrnainr (Paris: Seuil, 
1989). 
51. Raoul Girardet, L 1tli~ coklniale m Franc~. rS,I-IJOZ (Paris: La Table Ronde, 1971), 
pp. 7• ID-13· 
53· Basil Davidson, The African Past: Chronicles from Atltiquity to Modem Timu (London: 
Longmans, 1964), pp. 36-37· See also Philip D. Curtin, !mag~ of Africa: British Ide~~~ anti Aairm, 
178rrr8Jo, 2 vols. (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, •96.t); Bernard Smith, European 
Vision anti the South Pacific (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985)· 
54-Stephen Jay Gould, TIN Misrne~~sure of Man (New York: Norton, 1981); Nancy Stepan, 
TIN Idea of Rae~ in Science: Great Britain, r8orrrjlo (London: Macmillan, •9Bz). 
55· See the thorough account of these currents in early anthropology by George W. 
Stocking, Victorian Antbrupo/Dy;y (New York: Free Press, 1987). 
56. Excerpted in Philip D. Curtin, lmperialirm (New York: Walker, 1971), pp. •J8-59· 
57· John Ruskin, "Inaugural Lecture" (1ft7o), in The Worts of7obn Rrutin, Vol. zo, ed. E. 
T. Cook and Alexander Weddenburn (London: George Allen, 19os), p. 41, n. z. 
58. Ibid~ pp. 41-•B· 
59· V. G. Kiernan, "Tennyson, King Arthur and Imperialism," in his Poetr, Politics anti tbe 
People, ed. Harvey J. Kaye (London: Verso, 1989), p. •34· 
6o. For a discussion of one major episode in the history of the hierarchical relationship 
between West and non-West, see E. W. Said, Orimralism (New York: Pantheon, 1978), 
pp. 48-91, and jJIIIsitn. 
61. Hobson, lmpnialisrn, pp. 199""""100. 
6z. Cited in Hubert Deschamps, Les Mlthodes et les doctrines cokmiala Je Ia Frmue Ju XV/e 
siecle a nor fours (Paris: Armand Colin, 1953), pp. 116-17. 
63-See Anna Davin, "Imperialism and Motherhood," in Samuel, ed., Patriotism, Vol. 1, 
pp. 1034J. 
64-Michael Rosenthal, The Character Factory: Bllden-PO'IIJdli Boy Scouts anti the lmpmuiver 
of Empire (New York: Pantheon, 1986), especially pp. 13J-6o. See also H. John Field, TtYUJ!Jrd 
a Programme Bf Imperial Lifo: The British Empire at the Tum of the Cmtury (Westport Greenwood 
Press, 1981). 
65. Johannes Fabian, Time anti the Other: How Anthropoloy;y Makes Its Obf«t (New York: 
Columbia University Press, •983), pp. zs-69· 
66. See Marianna Torgovnick, Gtme Primitive: Savag~ !ntelkets, Modem Lives (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1990), and for the study of classification, codification, collecting, 
and exhibiting, James Clifford, The PreJit:ammt of Culture: T7l!mtieth Century Ethnography. 
Literahlre, anti An (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard U niversicy Press, 1988). Also Street, Savage in 
Lit(rt~~Ure, and Roy Harvey Pearce, Savatftm anti Civilization: A Study of the !ntlilln anti the 
Ammca, Mintl (1953; rev. ed. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988). 
67. K. M. Panikkar, Asia anJ Wertem Domitu~,ce (1959; rprt. New York: Macmillan, 1969), 
and Michael Adas, Machims as the Mearun of Mm· Science, Te&lmoloy;y, anJ!deologies of Werttm 
Domitu~nce (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989). Also of interest is Daniel R. Headrick, The 
Tools of Empire: Ttthno/oy;y anti European Imperialism in tiN Nineteenth Cenhlry (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1981). 
68. Henri Brunschwig, Frmeh Coltmialirm.r87I-1J14: Myths anti Realities, tr.ans. W. G. Brown 
(New York: Praeger, 1¢4), pp. 9""""10. 
69. See Brandinger, Rule of Darkness; Suvendrini Perera, Reaches of Empire: The English 344 Noter 
Novel frrlm Edgi!'WOI'th kJ DHms (New York: Columbia University Press, 1991); Chrisropher 
Miller, Blank Dllrl:ner.r: Afric•ni.rt Di.r&ollr.re in Fmu:b (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
198)). 
70. QJ!oted in Gauri Viswanarhan, The Ma.tl:.r of Con1Jile.rt: Liter•ry Study fJIIt1 British R11le 
in lndi• (New York: Columbia University Press, 1~), p. 132. 
71. Alfred Crosby, Ecologictdlmperi•li.rm: The BUJogicfll Exp•n.rWn of E11rope, Jl!frl§OIJ (Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986). 
71. Guy de Maupassant, Bel-Ami (188s); Georges Duroy is a cavalryman who has served 
in Algeria and makes a career as a Parisian journalist who (wirh some assistance) writes about 
life in Algeria. Later he is involved in financial scandals that attend the conquest of Tangiers. 
7l· Johannes Fabian, LIJ"f..liJge IJnd Colonifll Po'Wer: The AppruprifJtion ofS'W•bili in the Former 
BelgiiJn Congo. 181~rns (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986); Ranajit Guha, A Rille 
of Property for Bmffll: An E!.riJy on the /t1eiJ ofPerm~Jntmt Settlemnil (Paris and The Hague: Mouton, 
1963); Bernard S. Cohn, "Representing Authority in Victorian India," in Eric Hobsbawm and 
Terence Ranger, eds., The Invention ( Trlldition (Cambridge: Cambridge Univet:Sity Press, 
1983), pp. 18)-207, and his An Antbropologi.rt Among the Hi.rtori~JnS IJPid Other Etr•yr (Delhi: Oxfofd 
University Press, 1990). Two related works are Richard G. Fox, Lion.r of the PunjfJb: Culture in 
the MIJl:ing (Berkeley: University of California Press, 198)), and Douglas E. Haynes, Rhetoric 
IJPid Ritufll in Colonilll lndifJ: The SbfJping of Pukli& Culture in SuriJt City, Ilj::-1pzJ (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1991). 
74• Fabian, LIJngu•ge 1Jnt1 Colonifll PO'IIItr, p. 79· 
7)· Ronald lnden, l'lllllgining lndill (London: Blackwell, 1990). 
76. Timothy Mitchell, Coloni.ring EKJPf (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). 
77· Leila Kinney and Zeynep c;:elik, "Ethnography and Exhibitionism at the Expositions 
Universelles," A.r.remllla[!s 13 (December 1990), 3)"")9· 
78. T.J. Clark, The P•inting of Modem Lift: P•ri.r ;, the Art of Mtmet fJIIt1 His FolltnDtrr (New 
York: Knopf, 19~), pp. 133-46; Malek Alloula, The Color~iiJI H•rem, trans. Myrna and Wlad 
Godzich (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1986); and see also Sarah Graham­
Brown, l'lllllge.r ofWomm: The l'ortrtlyfll ofWomm ;, Pbomgrtlpby of the Middk Ea.tr, rllo-IPJO (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1988). 
79· See, for example, Zeynep c;:elik, Di.rplaymg the Orient· Architecture of Islam IJt Nmetemtb 
Century World's F•ir.r (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992), and Robert W. Rydell, 
All the World's IJ F•ir: Vi.riom of Empire IJf Amerittlfl lnteniiJtiontd Exporitionr, rl?lf-IJII (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1984). 
So. Herbert Lindenberger, Oper11: The Extr•wgfJIIt Art (lrhaca: Cornell University Press, 
1984), pp. 17o-8o. 
81. Antoine Gol~a, Gerpril&he mit Wieland W•gner (Salzburg: SN Verlag, 1¢7), p. 58. 
81. ()periJ IJ, No. 1 (January 1962), 33· See also Geolfrey Skelton, Widtind W•gner: Tbe 
Positive Sceptic (New York: SL Martin's Press, 1971), pp. 1)9 ff. 
83. Joseph Kerman, (}pmla.t Dr1111111 (New York: Knopf, 19)6), p. 16o. 
8+ Paul Robinson, Opn'• 1111d It1t:IJS: F1'!lm Mozt~rt kJ Str11u.rs (New York: Harper & Row, 
198)), p. 163. 
8). Ibid, p. 16+ 
86. V erdi'.r "Aid•':· Tbe Hi.rtory of IJII ()per• in Letters fJnt1 Documents, trans. and collected by 
Hans Busch (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1978), p. 3o 
87. Ibid, pp. 4, f· 
88. Ibid, p. 126. 
89. Ibid., p. I j'O. 
90. Ibid., p. 17. Notes 345 
91. Ibid., p. so. See also Philip Gossett, "Verdi, Ghislanzoni, and Aida: The Uses of 
Convention," Critictd Infjuiry a, No. 1 (1974),_ 29143+ 
92. VmJi's "AUla," p. •53· 
93· Ibid., p. m. 
9+ Ibid., p. 183. 
95· Stephen Bann, The Clothing of Clio (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 
pp.9)111. 
96. Raymond Schwab, Tbe On'mtal Rmairranee, trans. Gene Patterson-Black and Victor 
Reinking (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984), p. 86. See also Said, Orimflllit111, 
PP· 8e>--ll8. 
97· Martin Bernal, Billc/e Athm~~.· The A{ro111illtic Rootr of Cltusictd Civilizt~tiDn, Vol 1 (New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1987), pp. 161--88. 
98. Schwab, Orimtlll Rm~~imw:e, p. 25. 
99· Jean Humbert, "A propos de l'egyptomanie dans l'oeuvre de Verdi: Attribution ~ 
Auguste Mariette d'un sc~nario anonyme de l'o~ra Aida," Revue de Musicologie62, No.2 (1976), 
nsrss. 
100. Kinney and <;elik, "Ethnography and Exhibitionism,'' p. 36. 
101. Brian Fagan, The Rape of the Nile (New York: Scribner's, 1975), p. 178. 
101. Ibid., p. 176. 
103. Kinney and <;elik, "Ethnography and Exhibitionism," p. 38. 
104. Verdi'r ':4Uit~,"p. 44+ 
10 S· Ibid., p. 186. 
106. Ibid., pp. 161-62. 
107. Opera, 1986. 
1o8. Skelton, Wielllnd Wagner, p. 16o. See also Golea, GetpriJfbe mit Wielllnd Wagner. 
pp. 6z-63. 
109. Vmli's "AU/11," p. 138. 
no. Muhammd Sabry, Epirode de Ill fJuertiDn d'AfrifJue: L 'Empire egJptian rour It111ail d l'infir­
enre ant}o-frt!nfaiu (1Sffr1S7~) (Paris: Geuthner, 1933), pp. 391 f[ 
m. As in Roger Owen, The MU/dle FAst and the World Economy, JS(J()-1~14 (London: Me-
thuen, 1981 ). 
nz. Ibid., p. 121. 
113. David Landes, Ba111ters and P111bar (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,19s8). 
n+ Sabry, p. 313. 
IIJ. Ibid., p. 312-
116. Georges Douin, Hirtoire du regne du Khedive Ismail, Vol. z (Rome: Royal Egyptian 
Geographic Society, 1934). 
r 117. Landes, Bankers a11d Parb111, p. 109. 
n8. Owen, Middle Ran, pp. •4srJo. 
119. Ibid., p. 118. 
110. Janet L. Abu-Lughod. Cairo: 1001 Years of the City Virmrious (Princeron: Princeton 
University Press, 1971), p. 98. 
111. Ibid., p. 107. 
121. Jacques Berque, Egypt: lmperitdit111 and Revolution, trans. Jean Stewart (New York: 
Praeger, 1971), pp. 96--98· 
113-Bernard Semmel,.1amaiean Blood a11d Vi&torian Conrcimu: Tbe Gollmtllr F.yre Conll'l!versy 
(Boston: Riverside Press, 1963), p. 179. A comparable occlusion is studied in Irfan Habib, 
"Studying a Colonial Economy-Without Perceiving Colonialism," Modem A.rilm Studies19, 
No. 3 (198s), 3s5-81. Notes 
114-. Thomas Hodgkin, Nationalinn in Colonial Africa (London: Muller, 1956), pp. 19'"""59· 
115. See Adas, Maehine.r a.r the Measure of Men, pp. 199'"""17o. 
116. As a sample of this sort of thinking, see J. B. Kelly, Arabia, the Gulf tmi the We.rt 
(London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 19llo). 
117. Rosenthal, Chara&ttr Faetory, p. 51 and passim. 
118. J. A. Mangan, The Games Etbic tmi Imperialism: Aspett.r of the Diffusion of an IieJ 
(Harmondsworth: Viking, 1986). 
119. ].M.S. Tompkins, "Kipling's Later Tales: The Theme of Healing," Modem Language 
Rt!'Vi~ 45 (l9JO), f8-31· 
130. Victor Turner, Dramas, Fidtl.r; and Metaphors: Symbolic A&tion in Human Sodety (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1974), pp. ZJ8-J9· For a subde meditation on the problems of color 
and caste, seeS. P. Mohanty, "'Kipling's Children and the Colour Line," Raee and Class, 31, No. 
1 (•9119), 11-4o, also his "Us and Them: On the Philosophical Bases of Political Criticism," 
Yale 7oumal of Criticism 1, No.1 (1989), I-3•· 
'3'· Rudyard Kipling, Kim (Ijlol; rprt. Garden City: Doubleday, Doran, 1941), p. 516. 
131. Ibid, pp. JI6-17. 
133. Ibid, P. 5'7· 
134-JbitJ., p. 513. 
135-George Elior, Middlemarrb, ed. Bert G. Hornback (New York: Noi:ton, 1977), p. 544-
136. Mark Kinkead-Weekes, "Vision in Kipling's Novels," in Kiplir.g'.r Mind and Art, ed. 
Andrew Rutherford (London: Oliver & Boyd, 1964). 
'37· Edmund Wilson, "The Kipling that Nobody Read," The Wormd and the BD'W (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1947), pp. 1oo-1, 1o3. 
138. Kipling, Kim, p. 141. 
'39· lbid, p. z68. 
140. . Jbid, p. 171. 
141. Francis Hutchins, The Illusion of Permanmte: lJriti.rb Imperialism in India (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1967), p. 157. See also George Bearce, British Attitude.r TD'Wartl.r 
India, IJ£t-s8JI (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1961), and for the unravelling of the system, 
see B. R. Tomlinson, The Politi&~~/ Eeonomy of the RaJ; lfllorlfl'fl' The E&onomics of Deeolonization 
in India (London: Macmillan, 1979). 
141. Angus Wilson, The Strange Ride of Rudyard Kipling (Londo,r,: Penguin, 1977), p. 43· 
143· George Orwell, "Rudyard Kipling," in A Coll«tion of Essays (New York: Doubleday, 
Anchor, '9J4), pp. 13~35. 
144. Michael Edwardes, The Sabibs and the Lotus: The Briti.rb in India (London: Constable, 
19118), p. 59· 
145. See Edward W. Said, "Representing the Colonized: Anthropology's Interlocutors," 
Critical l"'fuiry 15, No. 1 (Winter 1989), ZoJ-1J. See also Lewis D. Wurgaft, Tbe Imperial 
Imagination: Magie tmi Myth in Kipling's India (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 1983), 
pp. 5418, and of course the work of Bernard S. Cohn, Antbropologin Among the Historians. 
146. See Eric Stokes, The English Ulilitaritm.r tmi India (Oxford: Clarendon Press, •9)9), 
and Bearce, British Attitudn TD'WIJrtis India, pp. 15314-On Bentinck's educational reform, see 
Viswanathan, Mash of CO"'fues~ pp. 44-47· 
147. Noel Annan, "Kipling's Place in the Historyofldeas," Victorian Studiei3, No.4 (June 
196o), 313. 
148. See notes 11 and 11: 
149. Geoffrey Moorhouse, India Britannica (London: Paladin, 1984), p. 103. 
,5o. Ibid, P· 1o1. 
IJI. Georg Lukacs, Thr Tbtory of the Novel, trans. Anna Bostock (Cambridge, M&SS.: MIT 
Press, 1971), pp. 35 If. 152. Kipling, Kim, p. 246. 
'53· Ibid., p. 248. Notes 
'5+ Lukacs, Theo'] oftbe Nove~ pp. •zs-z6. 
'55· Kipling, Kim, p. 466. 347 
156. Frantz Fanon, The Wmeheti of the Earth, trans. Constance Farrington (1961; rprt. New 
York: Grove, 1968), p. 77-For substantiation of this claim, and the role of legitimizing and 
"objective" dilicourse in imperialism, see Fabiola Jara and Edmundo Magana, "Rules of 
Imperialist Method," Dialmieal Antbropo/of;y 7, No. 2 (September 1982), us-36. 
'57· Robert Stafford, Seimtirt of Empire· Sir Rotimek Mllnbi.ron, Seimtijie Exploration tmtJ 
Vietorian ImperialiJ111 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989). For an earlier example, 
in India, see Marika Vicziany, "Imperialism, Botany and Statistics in Early Nineteenth­
Century India: The Surveys of FranCis Buchanan (ry6z-t829)," Motitm Antm Studies zo, No. 
4 (1986), 615-6o. 
158. Stafford, Seimti.rt of Empire, p. zo8. 
159· J. Stengers, "King Leopold's Imperialism," in Roger Owen and Bob Sutcliffe, eds., 
Studies in the Theo'] of Imperialism (London: Longmans, 1971 ), p. z6o. See also Neil Ascherson, 
Tbe King Inrorporated: Leopold I/ in tbe Age of Tru.r11 (London: Allen & Unwin, 1963). 
16o. Achebe, Hopes tmtJ lmpetlimmt.r; see note 24. 
161. Linda Nochlin, "The Imaginary Orient," Art in Ammea (May 1983), 118-31, 187"11L In 
addition, as an extension ofNochlin's essay, see the remarkably interesting Boston University 
doctoral dissertation by Todd B. Porterfield, Art in tbe Service uf Frmeh ImperialiJ111 in the Nmr 
Ean, 1'/~IS.,.S: Four Case Studies (Ann Arbor: University Microfilms, 1991). 
161. A. P. Thornton, The Imperial /tim tmtJ Its &emie.r: A Study in British PO'IJiel' (1959; rev. 
ed. London: Macmillan, 1985); Bernard Porter, Critiet of Empire: Briti.rb RAdieal Attitudes to 
Colonialism in Afriea, r8f1ri9I4 (London: Macmillan, 1¢8); Hobson, lmpmali.rm. For France see 
Charles Robert Ageron, L 'Antieolonialisme m Ffan&e tie ISJI .t 1914 (Paris: Presses Universitaires 
de France, 1973). 
163-See Bodelsen, Studies in Miti-Vietorian Imperialirm, pp. '4/ZI+ 
16+ Stephen Charles Neill, Colonialism tmtJ Christian M is.rio111 (London: Lutterworth, 
1¢6). Neill's is a verr. general work whose statements have to be supplemented and qualified 
by the large number of detailed works about missionary activity, for example, the work of 
Murray A. Rubinstein on China: "The Missionary as Observer and Imagemaker: Samuel 
Wells Williams and the Chinese," Ammean Studie.r (Taipei) 10, No.3 (September 198o), 31-44; 
and "The Northeastern Connection: American Board Missionaries and the Formation of 
American Opinion Toward China: 183o-186o," Bulletin of tbe Motitm Hi.rto'] (Academics 
Sinica), Taiwan, July 198o. 
165. See Bearce, British Attitudes TO'UJIII'ds India, pp. 65-'17• and Stokes, EntJish Utilitan"ans , 
tmtJ India .. 
166. Qpoted in Syed Hussein Alatas, Tbe Myth of the LIIZy Native: A Study of tbe Image uf 
rbe Malays, Filipinos, anti Java1111se from the Sixteenth to the Twentieth Cmtu'] and Irs Function in 
the ltieofot:J uf Colonial Capitalism (London: Frank Cass, •977), p. 59· 
·~67. Ibid., p. 6z. 
168. Ibid, p. 113. 
169-Romila Thapar, "Ideology and the Interpretation ofEarly Indian History," Revin11 
5, No. 3 (Winter 1981), 390. 
170. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, 0, Colonialism: Artides from tbe New York Tribune 
anti Olber Writinu (New York: International, 1971), p. 156. 
171. Katherine George. "The Civilized West Looks at Africa: 14oo-18oo. A Study in 
Ethnocentrism," /sir 49, No. 155 (March 1958), 66, 6')-7o. 
171. For the definition of "primitives" through this technique, see Torgovnick, Gone Notes 
Primitiue, pp. )41. See also Ronald L. Mees, S«ial Scimee anti the ltJioble Stwag~ (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1976), for an elaborated version of the four-stage theory of the 
savage based on European philosophy and cultural thought 
173-Btunschwig, French Colonialism, p. 14 
174· Robert Delavigne and Charles Andre Julien, Les Consnweteurs de kl FrrJnee d'oUM-mer 
(Paris: Corea, 1946), p. 16. An interestingly dilferent volume, although it deals with similar 
ngures, is Afrie~~n Proconsuls: European Governors in Africa, eds. L H. Gann and Peter Duignan 
(New York: Free Press, 1978). See also Mort Rosenblum, Miuion tu Civilize: The Frmcb Way 
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1986). 
17)· Agnes Murphy, The Ideology of F~h Imperialism, r8q-Ii8J (Washington: Catholic 
University of America Press, 1968), p. 46 and passim. 
176. Raoul Girardet, L 'Idle eo/oniale en Franee, rt,rrjtfz (Pa.ris: La Table Ronde, 1971), 
pp. 44-4$· See also Sruart Michael Persell, The Frmeb CtJonial LDI!Iry (Stanford: Hoover 
Institution Press, 1983). 
1n-Quoted in Murphy, /Jeolot;) of Frmeb Imperialism, p. 1). 
178. Raymond F. Betts, Assimilation anti Auoeiarion in Frmeb CtJonial Theory, r&, ... IJI4 (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1961), p. 88. 
179. I discuss this material with regard to theories of national identity mobilized for use 
in late-nineteenth-century imperialism in "Nationalism, Human Rights, and Interpretation," 
in Frtedom and lnterprtration, ed. Barbara Johnson (New York: Basic Books, 1991). 
18o. Betts, Assoeiation and Assimikltion, p. 108. 
18L Ibid., p. 174 
181. Girardet, L 1Jie coloniale m France, p. ,.a. 
183. For one small episode in the imperial competition with England, see the fascinating 
glimpse afforded by Albert Hourani, "T. E. Lawrence and Louis Massignon," in his /skim in 
European Thougpt (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), pp. n6-18. See also Christo­
pher M. Andrew and A. S. Kanya-Forstner, The Climax of Frmcb Imperial Expansion, Iflf4-IJZ4 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1981). 
184 David Prochaska, Making Algeria Frmeb: Colonialism in 86ne, r87friJZO (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 199o), p. 8). For a fascinaring study of the way French social 
scientists and urban planners used Algeria as a place to experiment on, and to redesign, see 
Gwendolyn Wright, The Polities ofDesif}l in Frmeb CtJonial Urllanism (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1991), pp. 66--84 Later sections of the book discuss the effect of these plans on 
Morocco, Indochina, and Madagascar. The dennitive study, however, is Janet Abu-Lughod, 
Rabat: Url!an Apartheid in MOI"O&Co (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 198o). 
18). Ibid., p. 114 
186. Ibid., pp. 141-41. 
187. Ibid., p. 1$). 
188. Ibid., p. 1f+ 
189-Ibid., p. 1SS· 
190. lbitl.. p. 70. 
191. Roland Barthes, Le Degrf ziro de l'emture (19)3; rpn. Paris: Gonthier, 1964), p. 1o. 
191. Raymond Williams, George Orwell (New York: Viking, 1971), especially pp. 7748. 
193-Christopher Hitchens, Prepared for the Worst (New York: Hill & Wang, 1989), 
PP· 78--9°· 
194 Michael Walzer makes of Camus an exemplary intellectual, precisely because he 
was anguished and wavered and opposed terrorism and loved his mother: see Walzer," Albert 
Camus's Algerian War," in The Company ofCriti&s: Social Criticism 11nd Political Commihtlent in 
rbe Twentieth Cm111ry (New York: Basic Books, 1988), pp. 136--;1. 
19)· Conor Cruise O'Brien, AI/Jm Camus (New York: Viking, 1970), p. 103-Notes 349 
196. Joseph Conrad, Last Errayt, ed. Richard Curle (London: Dent, 1916), pp. 1o-17. 
197. The later O'Brien, with views noticeably like these and different from the gist of his 
book on Camus, has made no secret of his antipathy for the lesser peoples of the "Third 
World." See his extended disagreement with Said in Salrn•gtmdi 70o-11 (Sprin~Summer 1986), 
6f-31. 
198. Herben R. Lottman, Albert C1P11111: A Biogrt~pby (New York: Doubleday, 1979 ). Camus's 
actual behavior in Algeria during the colonial war itselfis best chronicled in Yves Carri~re's 
L• Guerre J"Aigine IL· Le Temps Jet /Npardt (Paris: Fayard, 1969). 
199. r'Mis~re de Ia Kabylie" (1939), in Camus, Err•is (Paris: Gallimard, 1965) pp. 9orl. 
100. O'Brien, CIPtlllt, pp. n-z8. 
101. Camus, Exile •"" the Kingdotll, trans. Justin O'Brien (New York: Knopf,1958), pp. 31"""33· 
For a perspicacious reading of Camus in the Nonh African context, see Barbara Har)Qw, 
"The Maghrib and The Str•nger," Ali[3 (Spring 1983), 3!r"55· . 
zo1. Camus, Esr•ir, p. 1039. 
1o3. Qpoted in Manuela Semidei, "De L'Empire a Ia decolonisation a travers les manuels 
scolaires," Re1111e fr.nf11ite de rr:ierue politique 16, No. 1 (February 1961), 85. 
104. Camus, Err•it, pp. 1011-13. 
1o5. Semidei, "De L'Empire Ia Ia decolonisation," 15· 
zo6. Jean-Paul Sanre, Litrr•ry Ertayt, trans. Annette Michelson (New York: Philosophical 
Library, 1957), p. 31. 
107. Emir Abdel ~der, Emtt tpiritutls, trans. Michel Chodkiewicz (Paris: Seuil, 198z). 
zo8. Mostafa Lacheraf, L 'Alglrie: Nfllion el tocietl (Paris: Maspero; 1965). A wonderful 
fictional and personal reconstruction of the period is in Assia Djebar's novel L 'Amo11r. Ill 
font~itl (Paris: Jean-Claude Latt~s, 1985). 
109. Quoted in Abdullah Laroui, The History of the M•gnb: An lntnpretiw Er1ay, trans. 
Ralph Manheim (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977), p. 301. 
uo. Lacheraf, L 'Algerie, p. 9z. 
111. Ibid., p. 93-
111. Theodore Bugeaud, P•r l'Epie et ptlr Ill elmrr~~e (Paris: PUF, 1948). Bugeaud's later 
career was equally distinguished: he commanded the troops who fired on the insurgent 
crowds on·February 13,1848, and was repaid by Flauben in L 'Edue•tion rentimenrale, where the 
unpopular marshal's ponrait is pierced in the stomach during the storming of the Palais 
Royal, February 14, 1848. . 
113. Martine Astier Loutfi, Littlr.rure et eoloni.Iirme: L 'Exp•nrion eoloni.te vue tkznr kllinir•­
llln: rrnllllnttifll' fmnflllie, Il?t-IJ114 (Paris: Mouton, 1971). 
114. Melvin Richter, "Tocqueville on Algeria," Re!lifi'W of Poliries 15 (196~), 377· 
115. Ibid., 38o. For a fuller and more recent account of this material, see Marwan R. 
Buheiry, The Form•rion .,J Pereepti'on of the Modern Ar.b World, ed. Lawrence I. Conrad 
(Princeton: Darwin Press, 1989), especially Part 1, "European Perceptions of the Orient," 
which has four essays on nineteenth-century France and Algeria, one of which concerns 
T ocqueville and Islam. 
116: Laroui, Hittory of the M•greb, p. 305. 
117. See Alloula, Coloni.I H.rem. 
118. Fanny Colonna and Claude Haim Brahimi, "Du bon usage de Ia science coloniale," 
· in Le M.I de wir (Paris: Union Generate d'editions, 1976). 
119. Albert Sarraut, Gr•""eur et teroitllde eoloni.ler (Paris: Editions du Sagittaire, 1931), 
P· IJ3. 
uo. Georges Hardy, La Politigue eoJoni•k et k p•rt•ge au terre •ux XIXe tt XXe rieelet (Paris: 
Albin Michel, 1937), p. 441. 
m. Camus, Theatre, Rlr:its, Nouw/kr (Paris: Gallimard, 1961). p. 111o. 35° Notes 
111. Ibid., p. 1111. 
113. Seeley, Exptmrion of Engltmd. p. 16. 
114. Albert 0. Hinchman, The P11rsi011111111i rhe lnfemts: Politietd Argummr. for C11pitlllim 
Before lrr Trittmph (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1977), pp. 13:1:-'33· 
ns. Seeley, Exptmrion of Eng/lind. p. 193. 
n6. See Alec G. Hargreaves, The Cokmilll Exptrimce in Frmch Fiction (London: Macmillan, 
1983), p.JI, where this strange elision is noted and explained interestingly as rhe result of Loti's 
peculiar psychology and Anglophobia. The formal consequences for Loti's fiction are not 
noted however. For a fuller account, see the unpublished Princeton University dissertation, 
Panivong Norindr, Cokmi11lirm 11nd Fig11m ofrhe E~tnic in the Wm of Pi"" Loti (Ann Arbor: 
Univenity Microfilms, 1990~ 
. 2.~1 Benita Parry, Dtlusionr 11nd Dirctl~Jtrirr: Studier on lndi11 in the Britirh l11111gilllllion, 
rlltrt§Jtl (London: Allen Lane, 1971). 
CHAPTER THREE 
RESISTANCE AND OPPOSITION 
1. Andre Gide, L 1mmorlllirtt (Paris: Mercure de France, 1992), pp. 113""""14. 
1. Gide, The 1-oralut, trans. Richard Howard (New York: Knopf, 1970), pp. IJ8-J9. For 
the connection between Gide and Camus, see Mary Louise Pratt, "Mapping Ideology: Gide, 
Camus, and Algeria," College Lilmltllre 8 (1981), I.S:II-"74· 
3· As used by Chrisropher Miller, Bltmk Dmners: Afric11nist DUc011rse in Frmch (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1985); a profound philosophical critique of"Africanist" philoso­
phy is found in Paulin J. Hountondji, S11r Ill "phi/IJropbie i1fric11ini' (Paris: Maspero, 1976). 
Hountondji gives special priority in his critique to the work of Placide Tempels. 
4· V. Y. Mudimbe, The lrromlion of Afric11: Gnoru, Philotgplzy, 111111 the Order of KIIIJ'Wiedp 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988~ 
5· Raymond Schwab, The Oriental Rm~~u.rll~~&e, trans. Gene Patterson-Black and Victor 
Reinking (New York: Columbia Univenity Press, 1984). 
6. Frantz Fanon, The Wrmhed of the Earth, trans. Constance Farrington (1961; rpn. New 
York: Grove, 1968), p. 314. 
7· Basil Davidson, Africa in Modern History: The S"rch for 11 NN Societ:; (London: Allen 
Lane, 1978), pp. 178-So. 
8. Jean-Paul Sartre, "Le Colonialisme est un sysreme," in Sit1111tion.r V: Cokmilllisme et 
nlo-cokmitllirme (Paris: Gallimard, 1964). 
9· Sanre, "Preface" to Fanon, Wrttcbetl of the E11rth. p. 7· 
10. Davidson, Africll in Modern Hi.rtr~ry, p. zoo. 
n. Fanon, Wretched of the E11rth, p. 96. 
IZ. fbiJ., p. 101. 
13. Sartre, "Preface," p. z6. · 
14. Henri Grima!, DecokmiZIItion: The British, Frmch, D11tch ~~nd Belgi1111 Empires, rpiJrr¢J. 
ttans. Stephan de Vos (1965; rpn. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1978), p. 9· There is a 
massive literature on decolonization of which some noteworthy tides are R. F. Holland, 
E11rope1111 Decolonization, r§II-t§IL· An lfllb'odll&tO'J S11rvey (London: Macmillan, 1985); Miles 
Kahler, DecoloniZIIlion in Brit11in 11nd Frt~~~ee: The Domestic Consel[~tmcer of lntmllltionlll Reltllions 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984); Franz Ansprenger, The Dissollltion ofrhe Cokmilll 
Empires (1981; rpn. London: Routledge, 1989); A. N. Porrer and A.). Stockwel~ Vol 1, British 
lmperi11l Poli&J 11nd Decoloniztltion, rpJI-Jr, and Vol. z, IJ15rlf4 (London: Macmillan, 1987, 1989); 
John Strachey; The End of Empire (London: Gollancz, 1959). Notes 351 
IJ· Terence Ranger, "Connexions Between Primary Resistance Movements and Modem 
Mass Nationalisms in East and Central Africa," pts. 1 and 1, Jount~~l of A[ric1111 Hisklfy 9, No. 
3 (1968), 439· See also Michael Crowder, ed., West Afriam Remtt~~~u: The Mili~~~zy Resptmse to 
Collmitll Oc&t~p~Jtion (London: Hutchinson, 1971), and the later chapters (pp. 168 ff.) of S. C. 
Malik, ed, Dissmt, Protest 111111 Refonn in Inditln CiTJiliZIItion (Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced 
Study, t977). 
16. Michael Adas, Prupbets of Rebellion: Mi/lnulri1111 Protest MowmmtJ Against the Eurupe1111 
Colonial Ordw (Chapel Hill: University of Nonh Carolina, 1979). For another example, see 
Stephen Ellis, The Rising of the Red Sh11'U!Is: A RnJO/t in Mlldf~K~~~CIIr, I89J-I8J19 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1985)· 
17. Ranger, "Connexions," p. 631. 
18. Quoted in Afaf Lutfi al-Sayyid, Eg;ypt 1111d Cromer (New York: Praeger, 1969), p. 68. 
19. E. M. Forster, A P11u11geto /tuli11 (19~; rpn. New York: Harcoun, Brace&. World, 1951), 
p. 311· 
10. See the final pages, 314-10, of Benita Parry, Delusions 11nd Disrovmes: Studies on lndill 
in the British ltt~~~yjnlltion, J88tri9Jo (London: Allen Lane, 1971). By contrast, in The Rhetoric of 
English /tuli11 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991), Sara Suleri reads the relationship 
between Aziz and Fielding in psycho-sexual terms. 
21. Forster, P111s11ge to lndi11, p. 86. 
11. lllitl., p. 136. 
13-lllitl., p. 164 
2.4. Quoted in Francis Hutchins, The Tllwion of Pmnllnm&e: British Impmillism in Ituli11 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1¢7), p. 41. 
15. Forster, Pllisllge to lndill, p. 76. . 
2.6. Hutchins, Illusion of Pmt~~~nmce, p. til?. 
17: In Syed Hussein Alatas, The Myth of the L!R.y N111ive: A Study of the I11111ge of the Mlllllys. 
Filipinos, 1Jtul Jllv1111ese fmn the Sixteenth to the Twmtieth Century 1Jntl Its Fumtion in the Ideology 
of Cokmilll Cllpillllism (London: Frank Cass, 1977). See also James Scott, We~~ptms of the We~~k: 
Everyd11y Forms of Pe~~~lllll Resistllllte (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985~ 
z8. Sidney and Beatrice Webb, lndi11n Dillry (Delhi: Oxford University Press, t9BS), p. ~ 
On the oddly insulating atmosphere of colonial life, see Margaret MacMillan, W11111m of the 
R11j (London:·Thames &. Hudson, 1988). 
19. Parry, Del111ions 1Jnd Discoveries, p. 174 
30. Forster, P111s1Jge to Indi11, pp. to6-J. 
31. Qlloted in Ani! Seal, The E"'"f,mce of Itulitm NIJtJ"orullism: Corrrpetition and Collll6ortuion 
in the Liller Ninnemth Century (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971), p. 140. 
31. lllitl., p. 141. 
33· lllitl., p. 14 7· Ellipses in the original. · 
34· lllidq p. 191· 
35· Edward Thompson, The Othlfr Side of the Medlll (1926; rprt Westport: Greenwood 
Press, 1974), p. 16. 
36. Ibid., p. 116. See also Parry's sensitive account of Thompson in Delusitms 1111d Discoverin, 
pp. 164-'io1. 
37· Fanon, Wretched of the Ellrth, p. 1o6. 
38. Frantz Fanon, Blllek Sltin. White Mllsks, trans. Charles Lam Markmann (1952.; rprt New 
York: Grove Press, 1967), p. 111. As a complement to Fanon's early, psychologi;r;ing style, see 
Ashis' Nandy, The Intifllllle Enemy: Loss 11nd Rerovery of Self Undw Coltmilllism (Delhi: Oxford 
University Press, 1983~ . 
39· Raoul Girardet, L '!tile co/6nillk m Fmnce, r87I-191f2 (Paris: La Table Ronde, 1971 ), p. 136. 
40. Ibid., p. 148. 352 Noter 
41· Iflitl., pp.1Jir71. On Griaule see the excellent pages on his career and contribution in 
James Clifford, Tbe Predimmmt of Culture: T'lllmlieth Century Elhnotppby, Lit#r11fllr~ 11nd Art 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1988), pp. 55"""91; see also Clifford's account of 
Leiris, pp.16J-7+ In both cases, however, Clifford does not connect his authors with decoloni­
zarion, a global political context eminently present in Girardet. 
4-Z· Andre Malraux, La Voie 7f1]11k (Paris: Grasser, 19~o), p. 168. 
43-Paul Mus, Vier-N11m: Socioltif)e tl'uM gllm"l! (Paris: Seuil, 1951), pp. 134-~· Frances 
FitzGerald's prizewinning 1971 book on the American war against Viemam, Fire in tbe L11ke, 
is dedicated to Mus. 
44 Davidson, Afrim in Modem Hirtory. p. 155· 
45· Iflitl., p. 156. 
46. Fanon, Bla&k Skin, White Mukr, p. uo. 
47· Philip D. Cunin, The lmllf.t of Africa: Britis-h ltJem11nd Action,t78rrt8jo, 1 vols. (Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1¢4). 
48. Daniel Defert, "The Collection of the World: Accounts of Voyages from the Six­
teenth to the Eighteenth Centuries," Dillle&ticaJ AnthrrJfHIIOKJ 7 (1981), 11-10. 
49· Pratt, "Mapping Ideology." See also her remarkable ImpmaJ F,yer: Tr11vd Writing 11nd 
Tranrculturation (New York and London: Routledge, 1991). 
50· James Joyce, Uly.uer (1911; rprL New York: Vintage, 1966), p. 111. 
51. James Ngugi, The Riwr /JmJJem (London: Heinemann, 1965), p. 1. 
51. Tayeb Salih, Seuon of Mitptiot1 to the North, trans. Denys Johnson-Davies (London: 
Heinemann, 197o), pp. 4~50. 
53-Peter .Hulme, Colonial Encounter~: Europe and the Native Ctlrifi/Jean, 14.92-17.91 (London: 
Methuen, 1986). 
54· George Lamming, The Plearurer ofExik (London: Allison & Busby, 1984), p. 107. 
55· lbitl., p. 119. 
56. Roberto Fern,ndez Retamar, Ctllmtlfl and Other Errayr, trans. Edward Baker (Min­
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1989), p. 14. See as a corollary, Thomas Cartelli, 
"Prospera in Africa: Tbe Tempest as Colonialist Text and Pretext," in Shake.rpet~re Reprutluced: 
The Tat in Hutory 11nd ltJeoloo. eds. Jean E. Howard and Marion F. O'Connor (London: 
Methuen, 1987), pp. 9~115. 
57· Ngugi wa Thiongo, Deco/oniring the Mimi: The Politicr t( Lang~U~ge in African Litemturr~ 
(London: James Curry, 1986). 
58. Barbara Harlow, Rerir111nee Literature (New York: Methuen, 1987), p. xvi.ln this regard 
a pioneering work is Chinweizu, The Wert llmilhe Rt:rt t( Ur: White Predatorr. Bla&le Sltlva 11nt1 
lhe Africt~n Elite (New York: Random House, 1975). 
59· Aim~ Cesaire, The Collected Poetry, eds. and trans. Clayton Eshleman and Annette 
Smith (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), p. 46. 
6o. Rabindranath Tagore, N11tiotllllirm (New York: Macmillan, 1917), p. 19 and purim. 
61. W.E.B. DuBois, Tbe Soulr of Black Folie (190~; rprt. New York: New American Library, 
1¢9). pp. 44-45· 
61. Tagore, Natiotllllirm, p. 61. 
6~. . Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities-: Rtfkttiom"" lhe Origin llnt1 Spre11d ofN11riOtllll· 
inn (London: New Left, 1983), p. 47· 
64. lbjtl.. p. 51. 
65. Ibid., p. 74· 
66. Bill Ashcroft. Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiftin, The Empire Writer &ci: Theury and 
Practi&e in Port-ColtiniaJ Litert~tum (London and New York: Routledge, 1989). 
67. Eric Hobsbawm, N11tionr 11t1d N11tiotiiiiUm Since qlo: Progr11mme, Myth, Rea/if] (Cam-Note.r 353 
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990 ); Ernest Gellner, Nations anti Nlllionalirm (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1983). 
68. Partha Chatterjee, Naliomllist Thought tmti the Col!milll World: A Derimlive Discourre? 
(London: Zed, 1986), p. 79· See also Rajat K. Ray, "Three Interpretations of Indian National­
ism," in Essays in Modern Intiill, ed. B. Q Nanda (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 198o), 
pp. I-4J. 
69. Chatterjee, Nationalist Thought, p. 1oo. 
70. Ibid., p. 161. 
71. Davidson, Africa in Modem Histvry, especially p. 104. See also Gmeral History of Africa, 
ed. A. Adu Boaher, Vol. 7, Africa Untl" Col!mial Domination, r88triJJJ (Berkeley, Paris, and 
London: University of California Press, UNESCO, James Currey, 1990), and The Colonial 
Mommt in Africa: Essays on the MoTJeJMnt of Minds anti Materials, J.9fltrl.940. ed. Andrew Roberts 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). 
71. KumariJayawardena, Feminism anti Nllli~~t~~~limt in the Third Worlti(London: Zed, 1966), 
especially pp. 43-56, 73-1o8, 13154 and passim. For emancipatoty perspectives on feminism 
and imperialism, see also Laura Nader, "Orientalism, Occidentalism and the Control of 
Women," Cult14ral Dynamit:s1, No.3 (1989), 31t-5S. Maria Mies, Patriarchy and Aaumulanon on 
a Worlti Scale: Womm in the lntemational Division of Lal!our (London: Zed, 1~6). See also Helen 
Callaway, Gmtlw, Cullure anti Empire: European Womm in Colonilll Nigeria (Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press, 1967) and eds. Nupur Chandur and Margaret Strobel, Westrrn Women anti 
Imperialism: Complicily and Resistance (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991). 
73· Angus Calder, Revolutionary Empire: The Rise of the English-Speal:ing Empires from the 
Eight«nth Centl4ry to the qSo'r (London: Cape, 1981), p. 14 A philosophical and ideological 
accompaniment is provided (alas, in a terrible jargon) by Samir Amin, Eurocentrism, trans. 
Russell Moore (New York: Monthly Review, 19B9). By contrast, a liberationist account-also 
on a world scale-is in Jan Nederveen Pietersee, Empire anti Em11ncipation (London: Pluto 
Press, 1991). 
74· Calder, Revolutionary Empirt, p. 36. 
75· Ibid., p. 650. 
76. Eqbal Ahmad, "The Nco-Fascist State: Notes on the Pathology of Power in the 
Third World,'' Arah Studies Q.ymerly 3> No. 1 (Spring 1981), 17o-8o. 
n· James Joyce, A Porlnlit of the Artist as a Young M11n (1916; rprt. New York: Viking, 1964), 
p. 189. 
78. Thomas Hodgkin, Nationalimt in Colonial Africa (London: Muller, 1956), pp. 93-114 
79· Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, JOtrlJOO (Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1966), pp. 196-116. 
So. Neil Smith, Uneven Developmmt: Na~ure, Ct~pital, and the Protiut:t:ion of SP"'e (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1984), p. 101. 
81. Jbitl., p. 146. Further diffi:rentiations of space, with consequences for art and leisure, 
occur in landscape and the project for national parks. See W J.T. Mitchell, "Imperial Land­
scape," in Landscape anti PtnJJer, ed. W J.T. Mitchell (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1993), and Jane Car!"llthers, "Creating a National Park, 1910 to 1916," Joumal of South Afriean 
Stutlies 15, So. 1 (January 1989), 188-116. In a different sphere compare with Mark Bassin, 
"Inventing Siberia: Visions of the Russian East in the Early Nineteenth Century," Ameri&an 
Historical Review 96, No. 3 (June 1991), 763-94. 
81. Mahmoud Darwish, "A Lover from Palestine," in Splinurr ofBone, trans. B. M. Bannani 
(Greenfield Center, N.Y.: Greenfield Review Press, 1974), p. 13. 
83. Mary Hamer, "Putting Ireland on the Map," Textual Pre~&~ice 3, No. 1 (Summer 1989 ), 
184--201. 354 Notet 
84. Ibid., p. 195. 
85. Seamus Deane, Celtic Rnivalr: Err~Qr in Modm1 Irish LiteriiiUre (London: Faber & 
Faber, 19Bs), p. 38. 
86. Ibid, p. 49· 
87. Ibid. 
88. Wale Soyinka, Myth, LiteriiiUre •nti the Afric., World (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1976), p. 117. See also Mudimbe, ltWmtion of Africll, pp. 8)97· 
~-/bit/., PP· 119, 136. 
90· Fanon, Wretdml of tbe Em1h, p. 103. 
91. Cesaire, Colledeti Poetry, p. 71. 
91. Ibid., pp. 76 and 77· 
93· R. P. Blackmur, Ekvm Errii!JT;, the Europetm Nwel (New York: Harcourt, Brace & 
World, 1964), p. 3· 
9+ Mahmoud Darwish, The Muric ofHu~t~~~n Flerh, trans. Denys Johnson-Davies (London: 
Heinemann, 19Bo), p. 18. 
95· Pablo Nei:uda, Memoirr, trans. Hardie St. Marrin (London: Penguin, 1977), p. 130. This 
'passage may come as a surprise to anyone who had once been influenced by Conor Cruise 
O'Brien's essay "Passion and Cunning: An Essay on the Politics ofW. B. Yeats," collected in 
his P!Urion tmd Cut~t~ing (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1988). Its claims and information 
are inadequate, especially when compared with Elizabeth Cullingford's Yeats, lreltm4 .,, 
F!Ueism (London: Macmillan, 19B1); Cullingford also refers to the Neruda passage. 
96. W. B. Yeats, Colleekti Poems (New York: Macmillan, 1959), p. 146. 
97· Pablo Neruda, Fully E'flfjiO'IlJel" trans. Alastair Reid (New York: Farrar, Straus & 
Giroux, 19B6), p. 131. 
98. Yeats, Collectrtl Poary, p. '93· 
99· Fanon, Wmchetl of the EArth, p. 59· 
1oo. Gary Sick, AD Filii Down: America'r Tr•fic Eneoulfler 'IIJitb lnm (New York: Random 
House, 1985). 
101. Chinua Achebe, Thing FfJ/1 Aptm (1959; rprt. New York: Fawcett, 1969). 
1oz. Lawrence J. McCaffrey, "Components of Irish Nationalism," in Pmpettiver on Irish 
N#ti01111li1t11, eds. Thomas E. Hachey and Lawrence J. McCaffrey (Lexington: University of 
Kentucky Press, 1989), p. 16. 
103. Yeats, Coll«tetl Poetry, p. 211. 
IO+ Ibid., P· 341· 
toJ. Quoted in Hachey and McCaffrey, Pmpettiver on Irish NatiOtllllirm, p. u7. 
106, J!Jiti., p. 106. 
107. See David Lloyd, NatiOtlllliml tmd Minor Lilmlture: 7-er Claren« M~~tJgan ~~t~d tbe 
Emergmte of lri.rh Cultunll NatiOtlllliml (Berkeley: University of California Press, 19B7). 
1o8. For a collection of some of their writings see lreltl""'r Field D.ry (London: Hutchinson, 
•9Bs). This collection includes Paulin, Heaney, Deane, Kearney, and Kiberd. See also W.J. 
McCormack, The Battle of tbe Boolu (Gigginstown, Ireland: Lilli put Press, 19B6). 
109. R. P. Blackmur, A Primer of li!JIOI'IInce, ed. Joseph Frank (New York: Harcourt, Brace 
& World, 1967), pp. 2.1-37· 
uo. Joseph Leerssen, Mere Irish •"" Fior-Gh.el: Stutlier in tbe ltlefJ of lrirh Nationlllity, lt:r 
Dewlopmmt, •"" Littl'llry Exprerrion Prior to the Ninetemtb Celllury (Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
Benjamins, 19B6). 
m. Fanon, Wreteheti of tbe Em1b, p. 11o. 
112. Ibid., p. 11+ 
113. Yeats, Collected Poetry, p. 343· Note.r 355 
114-R. P. Blackmur, Llmguge tU ~hm: Errays in Poetry (London: Allen & Unwin, 1954), 
p.118. 
IIJ. fbifl., p. 119. 
116. Gordon K. Lewis, Smvery,lmperilllim,and Freedom (New Yorlc: Monthly Review,1978); 
and Robin Blackburn, The D-uert/mYuJ of Colonial Smvery, f77~I&fl (London: Verso, 1988). 
117. Thomas Hodgkin, "Some African and Third World Theories of Imperialism," in 
Stlltlier in the The6ry of lmperialirm, eds. Roger Owen and Bob Sutclilfe (London: Longman, 
•9n), P· 95· 
118. Marcel Merle, ed., L'AIIIiallonialime Etm1plm de LtU C11111r ll Karl Marx (Paris: Colin, 
1969 ). Also Charles Robert Ageron, L 'Anti&6/onialisme m FNn&e de Ilf?I ii ~4-(Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1973). 
119. Harry Bracken, "Essence, Accident and Race," Hermathma 116 (Winter 1973), 8~6. 
110. Gerard Leclerc, Antbropologie d eokmialisme: Errai rur l'binDire de l'afrieaninne (Paris: 
Seuil, 1971). 
1u J. A. Hobson, lmpmmism: A Study (1901; rprt. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1971), pp. n;-8+ 
111. Another example, caustically analyzed by C.L.R. James. is the case of Wilberforce, 
manipulated by Pitt, in the cause of abolition: The Blaele JaCG!Jin.r: TMUraint L '011'1Je11tlre ttnd the 
San Domingo Rt'Volution (1938; rprt. New York: Vintage, 1963), pp. J:t-54· 
113-See Noam Chomsky, American PtnDtT and the Ne'IJI Mandarins (New York: Pantheon, 
. •969 ), pp. 111-366. 
114-Girardet, L 1tlk eoloniale m FNn&e, p. 113. 
llJ. See Hue-Tam Ho Tai, Rmiiclllism anti the Origins of the Vidrlllme.re Rt"Volutitm (Cam­
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991 ), for an excellent account of young Vietnamese 
intellectuals in Paris between the wars. 
116. This is well described in Janet G. Vaillant, Bltlclt, Frmch. and Afric•: A Lifo of Uopold 
Sldar Smgllor (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990), pp. 8]-146. 
127. Raymond Williams, Clllture (London: Fontana, 1981), pp. 8:t-J· 
128. Ali Haroun, La 7' Wimya: Lit Gulfrre de FLN m Fran&e, I,J~¢z (Paris: Seuil, 1986). 
119. Alatas, Azyth of the Lazy Native, p. 56. 
· 130. Ibid., p. 96. 
131. James, Bltlclt Jacollinr, p. •98· 
132. George Antonius, The Arab A"Waltming: The SflJry of the Arab Ntttirmal Movemmt (1938; 
rprt. Beirut: Librairie du Liban, 1969 ), pp. 3o_s-6. 
'33· Albert Hourani, The Emtrgmte of the Modem Middle Ea.rt (Berkeley: Universiry of 
California Press, 1981), pp. 193-134 See also the Georgetown University doctoral dissertation 
of Susan Silsby, Allllmiur: Palertine, Zionism and Britirh l,periali.rm, IJIZ~lm (Ann Arbor: Uni­
versity Microfilms, 1986), which has an impressive amount of information on Antonius's life. 
134 Paul Buhle, C.L.R. J~>me.r: The Artirt tu Rt'Volutionary (London: Verso, 1988), pp. J6-J7.. 
'35· uAn Audience with CL.R.James," Third World Boolt Rt"View 1, No. z (1984), 7· 
136. Antonius, Arab A'IIJ(J/tmin& p. 43· 
137. Alatas, Myth of the Lazy Ntttiw, p. 1 Jl· 
138. Ranajit Guha, A Rule of Property for Bmgtll: An Erray on the Idea of PertlllltUflt Stttlemmt 
(Paris and The Hague: Mouton, 1¢3), p. 8. 
139. Guha, uon Some Aspects of the Historiography of Colonial India," in SIIIHIJtem 
Studies 1 (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1981), pp. J, 7· For the later development of Guha's 
thought, see his "Dominance Without Hegemony and Ia Historiography," Slllmltmo Stlltlie.r 
VI (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1~), pp. z1o-3o9. 
140. A. L. Tibawi, A Modem History of History, ln&luding Le!Hmon and Palettine (London: Notet 
Macmilhm, 11169); Albert Hourani, Arabic Tbo•gbt in tk Libmd Age, IJPI-Im (Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univenity Press, 198J); Hisham Sharabi, Ara!J lntdkemlllr liM the Wen:· Tk Formll­
tiw Ytlll'r, ISJJIJ!l4 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univenity Press, 197~); Bassam Tibi, Arall 
N11tionlllif1fl: A Critielll Alllllytir, trans. M. F. and Peter Sluglett (New York: St. Martin's Press, 
199o); Mohammad Abed ai-Jabry, N111Jtl 111-Aq/ 111-'Ara!Ji, z vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Tali'ah, 1984. 
1986). 
141. A. A. Duri, The Histtnit;11/ Formation of the Ara!J Nlltion: A St•tly in ltlmtity liM CIIIIJ'&io•r­
nerr, trans. Lawrence I. Conrad (1984; London: Croom Helm, 1987). 
141. Walrer Rodney, wThe African Revolution," in C.L.R. J11mer: Hu Lifo 11nd Work, ed. 
Paul Buhle (London: Allison & Busby, 1986), p. JS· 
14J· Guha, Rule of Property for Bmglli, p. 38. 
144 Ibid, p. 6:. 
14j'· Ibid, p. 14f· 
1f6. Ibid, p. 91. 
147. Eric Williams, C11pitlliirtn 11nd Sltwny (New York: Russell & Russell, 1961), p. zn. · 
148. Alatas, Myth a[ the L11z.y Nlltive, p. 100. 
149. James, Bk«ll !t~eobinr, p. x. 
I JO. /bid, p. 391. 
IJI. Quoted in Silsby, Antoniur, p. 184 
lj'Z.. Tariq Ali, The Nehnu find the Gtlndhir: An [Mitln Dymuty (London: Pan, 1985). 
IJJ. Theodor Adorno, Mini'lllll Morll/itl: Rtjle&tionr from t1 Dll'lllllgtd Lifo, trans. E.F.N.Jeph-
cott (19j'1; crans. London: New Left, 1974), p. 101. 
'.!'4· Conor Cruise O'Brien, "Why the Wailing Ought to Stop," The Obrm~n;June J, 1jlil4. 
J.!'j'. Fanon, Wretched of the EaTth, p. n. 
156. See S. P. Mohanry, "Us and Them: On the Philosophical Bases of Political Criti­
cism," Yale !ot~rntd ofCriti&irtn 1, No. z. (1989), 1-JI. Three examples of such a method in action 
are Timothy Brennan, Slllm11n Rwhdie t~nd the Thittl Worltl: Mythr a[ the N11tion (New York: St. 
Martin's Press, 1989 ); Mary Layoun, Tmvelr af t1 Genrt!: The Modem Novel find ldeo/Qgy (Prince­
ton: Princeton University Press, 1990); Rob Nixon, Lontlon Clliling: V. S. N11ipaw, Poneo/Qnilll 
Mt1nd11rin (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.). 
157. Embodied in the following remark made by British Foreign Secretary Lord Balfour 
in 1919, which has remained generally true so far as Western liberal opinion has been 
concerned: 
For in Palestine we do not propose even to go through the form of consulting the 
wishes of the present inhabitants of the country, though the American Commission has 
been going through the form of asking what they are. The four great powers are 
committed to Zionism and Zionism, be it right or wrong, good or bad, is rooted in 
age-long tradition, in present needs, in future hopes, of far profounder import than the 
desires and prejudices of the 700,000 Arabs who now inhabit that ancient land. In my 
opinion that is right. 
Quoted in Christopher Sykes, Crorrrotldt to lm~rl, I§Iri§4S (196s; rprt. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 197J~ p. .!'· 
158. Raphael Patai, The Ar/16 Mind (New York: Scribner's, lsr8J); David Pryce-Jones, The 
Cloted Circle: An lntwprettltion of the Ara!Jr (New York: Harper & Row, 1989); Bernard K. Lewis, 
The Po/iticlll L11ng1111ge a[ Islam (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988); Patricia Crone and 
Mic~ael Cook, Hag11rism: The Mlllling a[ the lrlamie Worltl (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1977). 
159. Ronald Robinson, "Non-European Foundations ofEuropean Imperialism: Sketch for 
a Theory of Collaboration," in Owen and Sutclilfe, Stwlitr in ihe Tbeory of lmperialirm, pp. n8, 
IZ.O. Noter 357 
16o. Masao Miyoshi, Ar We Saw Them: TIN First Japanes-e Embury " tbe Un~tl Sllltet (r81fo} 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 15179); Ibrahim Abu-Lughod, Tilt Arllb Rttliscovery of 
Europe: A Sttuly ;, Cultwrtd Encoullkrr (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963). 
161. Homi K. Bhabha, ~signs Taken for Wonders: Q.pestions of Ambivalence and Author­
ity Under a Tree Ourside Delhi May 1817," Cri"tl&llll111Juiry 12, No. 1 (I9ilf), 144-6f. 
161. Afghani's response to Renan is collected in Nikki R. Keddie, An lslflmie Retptnrre to 
lmperilllirm: Politi&/11 and Religiou.s Writing ofSfi:JYitl Jamlll ati-Din '4/-Afkb.mi"(1968; rpn Berke­
ley: University of California Press, 1983), pp. 181-87. 
163. Albert Hourani, "T. E. Lawrence and Louis Massignon," in Is-lam in European Thought 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 19511), pp. n6-18. 
164 Yeats, Colkt:tetl Poetry, p. 49· 
J6f. Chatterjee, NatioPIIliirt ThoufiJt, p. 147· 
166. Ibid, p. 169-
167. V. S. Naipaul, Am011g the Beliewrr: An Is/ami& Journey {New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1981); 
and Gt~millat {New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1517f). Also his lntlia: A W(JIUI(/etf CiviliZ41ion (New 
York: Vintage, 15177) and An AtN of Darkner.r (New York: Vintage, 1981). 
168. Claude Liauzu, Aux origiller tier tierr-tiiOtltlimer: Cokmirlr n anti-eolonillliste.r en Fnmee 
(IJII~IJIJP) (Paris: L'Harmattan, 1981), p. 7· · 
1651. V. S. Naipaul, A Bent/ in the Ri'ller (New York: Knopf, 19751), p. 144 
170. Davidson, Afriea in Modmr Histqry, p. 37+ 
171. Fanon, Wl'l!t&hetl of the Earth, p. 88. 
171. Ibid., p. fl. 
'73-lbitl., p. 4 7· 
174 Ibid, p. 104 
11f· lbitl., p. 1o6. On the subject of~re-introducing mankind into the world" as treated by 
Fanon, see the perceptive discussion by Patrick Taylor, The Namllive of Likration: Pmpeetiwr 
011 A.fro-Carililean Literlll,_, Popular Culture anti Polities-(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1989 ), 
pp. M+ On Fanon's misgiving about national culture, see Irene Gendzier, Frantz Fanon, a 
Biography (15173; rprt. New York: Grove Press, 1518f}, pp. 114-30. 
176. Georg Lukacs, His$ty anti Clatr Cotueiou.sner.r: Stlltlin in M11r.rin Dialeetier, trans. 
Rodney Livingstone (London: Merlin Press, 15171), p. 15151. 
177· •Fanon, Wrerchd of tiN Eanb, p. fl. 
178. lbitl., p. j1. 
1751· lbitl., pp. 88, 93-
18o. lbitl., p. 93· 
181. lbitl., p. 51+ 
18:1.. Albert Memmi, Tbe Cokmizer and the Coltmizetl (151f7i trans. New York: Orion Press, 
•516f). 
183. Fanon, WretdJI!(/ of the Eartb. p. 107. 
18+ lbitl., p. 114 
!Sf. lbitl., p. 11f. 
186. Jbitl., p. 131· 
187. Jbiti., p. 1f3. 
188. lbitl., p. 1f51· 
189. lbitl., p. 10J. 
'90· /bitl., p. 14 7· 
191. Amflcar Cabral, Unity 11ntl Strwi!P: Sptr&her and Writings, trans. Michael Wolfers (New 
York: Monthly Review, 15179), p. 143-
191. Michel Chodkiewicz, "Introduction," to Emir Abdel Kader, Eerirl .tpiritwls, trans. 
Chodkiewicz (Paris: Seuil, 1981), pp. 1o-21. Notes 
193. Jalal Ali Ahmad, OccidmtOtir: A Pklguefrom the Wert, trans. R. Campbell (1978; Berkeley: 
Mizan Press, 1984). 
19+ Wole Soyinka, ':Triple Tropes of Trickery," Tmnsition, No. 54 (1991), 178-83. 
'95· Anwar Abdel-Malek, "Le Project de civilisation: Positions," in Ler Conditions Je 
l'indepmJmce lflllitmt~le thnr le monde modeme (Paris: Editions Cujas, 1977) pp. 4~509· 
196. Abdullah Laroui, The Cririr of the Ara!J /ntelleaullk (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1976), p. 100. 
•97· Chinua Achebe, Hoper and lmpeJimmts: Seleetetl Errays (New York: Doubleday, Anchor, 
1989 ), p. 76. 
198. The phrase first turns up in Michel Foucault, DircipliM and Punirb: The Binb of the 
Priron, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Pantheon, 1977), p. z6. Later ideas related to this 
notion are throughout his The History of Sext~t~lity, Vol. r, trans. Robert Hurley (New York: 
Pantheon, 1978), and in various interviews. It influences Chanral Moulfe and Ernest Laclau, 
Hegmtmy ami Socilllirt Strateg;y: TOWtlrdr 11 RIJJit:t~l Democrlllic Politi'cr (London: Verso, •?85). See 
my critique in "Foucault and the Imagination of Power," in Fout:t~ult: A Critit:tll Re(l(/"-ed. 
David Hoy (London: Blackwell, 1986), pp. 1>W-JS· 
199· I discuss this possibility in "Michel Foucault, 1916-1984.,'' in After FoU&ault: Hum1mistic 
KtiO'IJJiedge, POtlmodern Cbtlilmger, ed.Jonathan Arac (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 
1988), pp. &-9. 
100. Jiirgen Habermas, AuiiJnomy ami Solidarity: lntenJirwr, ed. Peter Dews (London: Verso, 
1986), p. 187. 
101. James, Bill cit 711&0binr, p. 401. 
102. OJitl 
lOJ. OJitl, P· 401. 
CHAPTER FOUR 
FREEDOM FROM DOMINATION IN THE FUTURE 
1. Michael Barratt-Brown, After lmperilllirm (rev. ed. New York: Humanities, 1970), p. viii. 
z. Arno J. Mayer, The Pmistente of the Oltl Regime: Europe to the Gre~~t War (New York: 
Pantheon, 1981). Mayer's book, which deals with the reproduction .of the old order from the 
nineteenth to the early twentieth century, should be supplemented by a work that derails the 
passing on of the old colonial system, and trusteeship, from the British empire to the United 
States, during World War Two: William Roger Louis, lmperilllirm at Bay: The UniteJ Sftller and 
the De&olonization oftbe Bniirb Empirt, IHJ-IHJ (London: Oxford University Press, 1977). 
J· Nonb-Soutb: A Pro[,Trlm for Survival (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 198o). For a bleaker, 
and perhaps truer, version of the same reality, see A. Sivananden, "New Circuits oflmperial­
ism," Raee and Ckm JO, No. 4 (April-June 1989), 1-19. 
+ Cheryl Payer, The Del!t Trap: The /MF ami the Third Worltl (New York: Monthly 
Review, 1974). 
5· Nonb-Soutb, p. 175. 
6. For a useful history of the three worlds classification, see Carl' E. Pietsch, "The Three 
Worlds, or the Division of Social Scientific Labor, circa 195C>-1975," Compartnfve Stflllies in 
Society ani His~ry 2J (October 1981), 56s-9o. See also Peter Worlsley's now classic The Third 
World (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964). 
7· Noam Chomsky, Tti'UJIJrdt a NevJ Coltl War. Ersayr on the Curmrt Crisir ami HO'I/1 We Got 
Thert (New York: Pantheon, 1982), pp. 84~5. 
8. Ronald Steel, Walter Lippma"" and the Amerit:tln Century (Boston: Little, Brown, 198o), 
P· 496. Notes 359 
9· See Anders Stephanson, Kmr~~~n and the AnofFM'eip Policy (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1989), pp. 167, •73· 
10. Richard]. Barnet, The RootrofWar(New York: Atheneum, 197z), p. z1. See also Eqbal 
Ahmad, "Political Culture and Foreign Policy: Notes on American Interventions in the Third 
World," in For Better or Worse: The Ammcan Injlumce in the World, ed. Allen F. Davis (WestpOrt: 
Greenwood Press, 1981), pp. 119-3•· 
n. V. G. Kiernan, America: The New Imperiali1111: From White Settlemmr trJ WtWIJ Hegemony 
(London: Zed, 1978), p. 1z7. 
lZ. Albe~ K. Weinberg, MA,jftrt Destiny: A Sflltiy of Nationalirt Exptmritmirm in American 
Hirmry (Gloucester, Mass.: Smith, 19J8). See also Reginald Horsman, R~~&e and Manifest Destiny: 
The Origin of Ameri«m Rtuial Ant}o-Saxonism (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
•98•). 
13. Richard Slatkin, Regmerfllitm Through Vio/m&e.· The MythoWg, of the Ameni:tm Fnmti4r, 
Iif~H~-I8tfo (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 1973), p . .f.l'7· See also its sequel, The Fatal 
Envirrmmmt: The Myth of the Frontier in the Age of Jndurtria/iutitm, I8oo-II9o (Middletown: 
Wesleyan University Press, 198J). 
14. C.L.R. James, Mariners, R~lllier and Ctulii'IDifJr: The Stf»Y of Hmr~~m MJvilk anti the 
World We Liw: In (I9J'3i new ed. London: Allison & Busby, 198J), p. J• and pturim. Also Kiernan, 
Amerie~~, pp. 49-".fO· 
1J. See J. Michael Dash, Haiti and the United Stater: Nati0r111l Stereotyper anti the Liter~~ry 
lm~~gir~~~tion (London: Macmillan, 1988), pp. 9, n-1J and pturim. 
r6. Kiernan, America. p. zo6. · 
17. T6itl., p. 114 
18. Irene Gendzier, Managing Political Chanu: Social Scimrirtr and the Third WtWIJ (Boulder 
and London: Westview Press, J98J), especially pp. 4C>--41, 117-47· 
19. Many Vokes, One Worltl (Paris: UNESCO, 198o). 
zo. Anthony Smith, The Geopolitics oflwformation: HOTD Wttrtem Culturr Dominates the Worltl 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 198o), p. 176. 
11. Herben I. Schiller, The Mind M~~r~~~gerr (Boston: Beacon Press, 1973) and Mars Commu­
nications and American Empirt~ (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969); Armand Mattelan, Tmnrnationalr 
and the Thirti Worltl: The S~n~ggle for Culture (South Hadley, Mass.: Beigin & Garvey, 1983). 
These ·&re only three works among several produced on the subject by these writers. 
zz. Munif's five novels in the series appeared in Arabic between 1984 and 88; two volumes 
have appeared in excellent English translations by Peter Theroux, Cin"er of Salt (New York: 
Vintage, 1989) and The Trmeh (New York: Pantheon, 1991). 
13. James A. Field,Jr, Ameriuantl the Meditm'llnean World, 177~I88z (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1¢9), especially Chapters 3. 6, 8, and u. 
14 Richard W. Van Alstyne, The Rising Americ11n Empin (New York: Norton, 1974), p. 6. 
· 'J'· Fouad Ajami, "The Summer of Arab Discontent," Foreign Affairs 69, No. J' (Winter 
1990-'91), I. , 
16. One of the leading historians of Islamic an, .Oieg Grabar, discusses the city of 
Baghdad as one of three foundational monuments of the anistic heritage: The Formation of 
lrklmic Art (1973; rev. ed. New Haven: Yale University Press, 199J), pp. 64""7L 
z7. Kiernan, America, pp. z6z-63 . 
. z8. Arnold Krupat, For Those Who C11111e Aftttr.· A Smtly of Native Amerie~~n AUTIJIJiography 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 198J)· · 
z9. Basil Davidson, "On Revolutionary Nationalism: The Legacy of Cabral," Race anti 
Class 27, No. 3 (Winter 1986), 43· 
30. Tbitl., 4+ Davidson amplifies and develops this theme in his deeply rellective The Blat:ll 
MtmJ-Burden: Afriea and the Cune ofthtt Nation-SIIIte,(New York: Times, 1991). Notes 
31. Timothy Brennan, "Cosmopolitans and Celebrities," Rt1~ tiM Cltur 31, No. 1 (July­
September 1989 ), 1-19. 
31. In Herberr I. Schiller, Clllturr, /ru:: The Ctwportlte Tt~kt!II'Ver of Pulilk Expmrion (New 
York: Oxfurd Universiry Press, 1989 ). 
33-Immanuel Wallerstein, Hi.rmriclll Ct~piltllirm (London: Verso, 19B3), p. 6f and pt~rrim. See 
also Giovanni Arrighi, Terence K. Hopkins, and Immanuel Wallerstein, Antis:Jnemic Mow­
ments (London and New York: Verso, •91f9). 
34· A very compelling account of this is given by Jonathan Ree in "lntemationaliry," 
Rllliiftll Philoropby, 6o (Spring 1991), ~~~- . 
35· Bernard S. Cohn, "Representing Authoriry in Victorian India," in The lll'llnllion of 
Trllliition, eds. Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger (Cambridge: Cambridge Universiry 
Press, 1983), pp. 191...Zo7. 
36. Adonis, An ltiii'IIJumon to Artlll Poeticr, trans. Catherine Cobban (London: Saqi, 1990 ), 
P· 76. 
37· .Seamus Deane, "Heroic Styles: The Tradition of an Idea," in lreltlnJ'r Field IJtly 
(London: Hutchinson, •985), p. fS. 
38. Ken Ringle, The Wt~rhington Port, March 31, •99•· The caricatural attacks on the 
exhibition have an excellent antidote in the massive and intellectually compelling caralogue 
The Wm 111 Americ11: Reinterpreting I'IMger of the Fm~tier, IIZD-IJJO, ed. William H. Truetrner 
(Washington and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1991). A sampling of visitors' re­
sponses to the exhibition is reproduced in Americlltl Art f, No. 1 (Summer 1991), ~~~-
39· This notion is explored with extraordinary subdery in Homi K. Bhabha, "The 
Postcolonial Critic," Am~~~ 96 (1991), 61-63, and "DissemiNation: Time, Narrative, and the 
Margins of the Modem Nation," Nt~tion tiM Nt~rrtltion, ed. Homi K. Bhabha (London and New 
York: Routledge, 1990), pp. l91)U. 
4"· Paul Kennedy, The Rise t1M Filii of the GINI Pvwerr: &onomic Cht~t~ge tlrui Mililflry 
Conjlia frDm IJOD-ZootJ (New York: Random House, 19B7). 
41. Joseph S. Nye,Jr., Bound to Leu: The Clxmging Ntllllrr of Ameriet~t~ PO'IIItr' (1990; rev. ed. 
New York: Basic, 1991), p. z6o. 
41. Ibid, p. 161. 
43· The Hu'IMnitier in Amtrico Life: Report of the C11t111t1i.rrion on the HII'IMnilier (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, •9Bo). 
44· In Edward W. Said, The Wor/J, the Text, tlrui the Critie (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press, 1983), pp. u6-47. 
; 45· Robert A. McCaughey, lt11emlllionlll StuJier tlrui .ktllkmie Et11erprire: A Chtlpter in the 
Endorurr of Amtrictltl Letm~ing (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984). 
+6. Theodor Adorno, Minima Momlill: Rejleetionr frDm alJtlmatpl Life. trans. E.F.N.Jeph­
cott (19.)1; trans. London: New Left, 1974), p. $$· 
47· In Edward W. Said, Covering lrl11111 (New York: Pantheon, 19B1). 
48. Fredric Jameson, "Postmodemism and Consumer Sociery," in The Anti-Aerthetic: 
Esrays on PortmoJrm Clllturr, ed. Hal Foster (Porr Townsend, Wash.: Bay Press, 19B3), pp. 11~lf. 
49-Eqbal Ahmad, "The Neo-Fascist State: Notes on the Pathology of Power in the 
Third World," Af'M StuJier !l_~~t~rterlJ 3, No. 1 (Spring 1981), 17o-8o. 
so. Eqbal Ahmad, "From Potato Sack to Potato Mash: The Conte~porary Crisis of the 
Third World," Artlll Strulier !l_~~t~rterl) z, No. 3 (Summer 19&), 130"-JZ. 
51; Ibid, p. 131. 
fli Paul Virilio, L7nreturiti Ju tmitoirr (Paris: Stock, 1976), p. 88 tr. 
$3• Jean-Fran~is Lyotard, The PortmoJrm Coruiititm: A Report on KntndeJge, trans. Geoft" 
Bennington and Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University ofMinnesota Press, 19B4), pp. 37, 46. Notes 
5+ Masao Miyoshi, OfCmter: Pfi'UJer fill(/ Clllturr Relalitmr lkl'wem J•JNZn '""'the Unitetl 
Sflltes (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991), pp. 613-:4 
55· T. S. Eliot, "Little Gidding," in Collected Poemr, 1J1op-I¢z (New York: Harroun, Brace 
& World, 1963), pp. zo-r--3. 
56· Gilles Deleuze and F~lix Guattari, Mille Platn~ux (Paris: Minuit, 198o), p. 511 (transla-
tion mine). 
57· Virilio, L 'lrmturite du twritlJirr, p. 8+ 
s8. Adorno, Mit~ima Mortlli4, pp. 46-47. 
59· /6ii., pp. ~ 
6o. Ibid, p. 68. 
61. f6itf., p. 8L 
61. Ali Shariari, On the S«iology II[ lrl#m: Lerturrr by Ali Si!llrillti. trans. Hamid Algar 
(Berkeley: Mizan Press, r979), pp. 91-93· 
63. This is described at length in my Begit1mt1gr: lllletltion ""'Method (1975; tprt New York: 
Columbia University Press, 198.f). 
6+ John Berger and Jean Mohr, A11otber W~&II[Telli•g (New York: Pantheon, 1981), p. ro8. 
6.f. Immanuel Wallerstein, "Crisis as Transition," in Samir Amin, Giovanni Arrighi, 
Andre Gunder Frank, and Immanuel Wallerstein, Dy1111mic.r II[ Glob~~~ Criri.r (New York: 
Monthly Review, 1~1), p. 30. 
66. Hugo ofSt Victor, Didructdic/111, trans. Jerome Taylor (New York: Columbia Univer­
sity Press, 1¢1), p. 101. Index 
Abbas, Farhat, 116, 171 · 
Abbasid civilization, 197 
Abbey Theatre, 131 
Abdei-Malek, Anwar, 119, z6o 
Abdu, Muhammad, 34o 151 
Abu Deeb, Kamal, 319 
Abu-Lughod, Ibrahim, Tbe Amb RetlitetJ'Ila] 
o/E•rPJNl, 161 
Abu-Lughod,Janet, Ct1iro: JfJ(II Yftll't oftbe 
City Vittoriotu, 118-19 
Abu-Lughod, Lila, xxiv 
Achebe. Chinua, xx, 31, 76, 16j', 143, 174o zn; 
Anthills o/ tbe St~Vtltlflllh, 3o8; Thi11g Ftl/l 
AjJIIft, 135 
Adas, Michael, 131, f98; M~~&hitMs t11 tbe 
Met~~~~" of Mm: S&imee, TecbnoltJo, tmtl 
ltltulotjes o/ Westml Domit~t~t~&e, 108 
Aden, 17, 135 
Adonis (Ali Ahmed Said). 313, 319 
Adorno, Theodor, n8, 1)8, 191, 304o 316, 
311• m Afghani, Jamal al-Oin al-, 34o Zj'1, 163 
Afghanistan, 73, IO.f 
Africa, xi, xiv, xviii, xxi, .f, 8, 14o 17, 19, n, 
33· 4f, j'l, p, .f.f, .f9, 64> 70, 71, 73. 76. 81, 
81, 99, 1010 1o6, 1o8, Uf, 11.f0 117, 131, 16j', 
168, 173. 190, •97· llf, 116, 118, 221, 113> 
114o 116, 117, 1151, 153, 159, 165, 167, 168, 
18.f, 305, 309, 311, 313, 314o 319; African 
representations of, 38, 111, 12.9; between 
World Wan, 196; lirerarure of, 139; 
media representations of, 38; nationalism, 
143; oppositional histories of, lfOi 
philosophy, 193; represented by Conrad, 
xx, n-16, zno, 6), 67, 68, 131, 164o 166, 167, 173, zo1, 191, 313i represented by 
Dickens, 79i represented by Gide, 107; 
resistance to imperialism, 198, 153; 
resistance stories, 11), stereotypes of, xi; 
struggle for territory in, 11o; see IIIIo 
Algeria; Coprad, Joseph; Egypr; Gide, 
Andre; nlgrihltle 
Africanism, xi, 38, .f1, no, 193 
Afri&/1111, Tbe, 3&-39 
Afrocentrism, xx, xxiv, 307, 310, 311 
Ahmad, Eqbal, 18, 12.3, 165, 315 
Ahmad, Jalal Ali i-, Oc&idl!lllolis: A Pt.g.le 
ftrnn tbe West, uS, 175 
Ahmed,Jalal Alii-, 30 
Ahmed, Leila, Wtll!lm tmtl Gentler ;, lsf11111, 
xxiv 
Ahuma, Samuel, 196 
Alatas, S. H~ The Myth of the LIIZ;y N11tiw, 
41, 1fj'-f6, 149, 1.fl, 1j'j'-j'6, Z.f9"'ilo 
Alexander the Great, 33 
Algeria, xix, xxi, u, l.f, 17, 38, 63, 97, no, 
199, 119, 114o 116, n8, 119""1o, 141, ZfZ, 
1f4, 159, 164o 167, z68, 171, 174, z8z, 317, 
31&; armed resistance in, xii; between 
World Wan, 18o; and French attists, xiv; 
French domination, 16~;, represented 
by Camus, 66, 16o, 161; represented by 
Gide, 161, 191; represented by Srendhal, 
98; War oflndependence, 16, 38, 171, 174o 
178; see 11/so Camus, Albert 
Algerian National Liberation Front, 1741 
181, 197, 14f, 163, z67, 171 
Algien, Univenity of, 181 
Ali, Mohammad, 116 
Ali, Muhammad, z6z Index 
Ali, Tariq, zs8 
Alloula, Malek, The Cofot~illl H11mn, m, 183 
America, colonies in, xv; English 
colonization, So, 8J; representation of, 106 
"America as West" exhibition, 314 
American Civil War, 116 
American frontier, 138 
American Indian, 188, 314 
Amin, ldi, xxiv, u, 119 
Amin, Samir, 6 
Am~re, Andr~ Marie, n8 
Anderson, Benedict, zoo, 11 ,S""""J6, 131 
Angola, under rule of Portugal, xxii 
Annan, 198 
Annan, Noel, "Kipling's Place in the 
History of Ideas," IH 
anthropology, 35, 41, 44• .q.S, j'O, j'6, 170, 193; 
and colonialism, 151 
Antigua, 59, 66, 76, 171, zw; Itt lllro Ausren, 
Jane 
Antilles, 8.q., 90, u6 
Antipodes, 165 
anti-systemic movements, 311, 334-,s 
Antonius, George, 54> 143; The Are 
A'IIIII#:mitl& 114, 14j'-f6, 1.q.ll--49 1 1j'1-;53 1 
1j'j'-j'8, z6o 
Apollinaire, Guillaume, 144 
Arab Christian Protestants, 31r41 
Arab Renaissance, 40 
Arab revolt, Zj'I, Itt lllro Antonius, George; 
Lawrence, T. E. 
Arabi, Ibn, z 75 
Arabism, xxvi, 114o 307i ree lllro nationalism 
Arabs, xxiv, 191413• 197, 199, 117, 147, 157, 
263, 301; media representation of, 36-,7, 
29.r. 1er lllro Gide, Andre; Islam 
Arctic, British exploration of, 173 
Arendt, Hannah, xviii, j', 24-15, 116 
Argentina, 89, 316 
Argeron, Charles-Robert, 179 
Arkoun, Muhammad, 319 
Arnold, Matthew, 71, IOj', IJO, y6, 31o; 
Cuflll" liM AtiiiiThy, xiii, 45, 130--]1 
art, 8o 
Asad, Tala!, At~thropolop;y ""tl the Colot~illl 
/itiCOIItltn", 41, lj'1 
Asia, 14, 17, 19, 33· j'j', 8z, 83, 101, 1o6, 131, lj'o, 
197, 1'}8, 114, uo, 114o 143, 3os; repre­
sented by Conrad, xx, zs, 166 
Athens, 111 Auerbach, Erich, 44> 318, 33Si Mimeri1, 43o 
47, 316, 33s; "Philologie der Weltlitm~tllr," 
45 
Austen, Jane, j'1, 6o, 68, 71, 71, 75• 77, 81, 98, 
101, Uj', 135, 146, 3"5i Mt~t~1jield P11rk, 59, 
61, 66, 76, 79, 84417, 171, 1S9i Ptm~IISitm, 
66 
Australia, xi, xiv, xxii, xxvi, j', 73, 101, 1o6, 
1o8, 134, 198, 114, n1, 318; as penal colony, 
xv; represented by Carter, xv-xvi; 
represented by Dickens, xiv-xvi, 63, 
66, Hi represented by Hughes, xv 
Austro-Hungarian empire, xxii 
avant-garde, 144 
Baath Party, s 
Baden-Powell, First Baron, 1o-;-o8, 137--]8 
Bagehot, Walter, Pbyric1 11M Politic1, 83 
Baghdad, 7, 111, 295, 297, 301 
Baldwin, Stanley, 133-34 
Balzac, Honore de, 9, 47, 77, 181; Lll Co111int 
Bette, 64, 99i Lll Pt1111 tie c/JIIgrill, 99 
Bann, Steven, The Clothit~g of Clio, 117 
Barnet, Richard, 185, 287; The Rootr of W11r. 
186 
Barratt-Brown, Michael, After lmperilllism, 
181 
Barthes, Roland, 166, 328; Le TJevl ziro tie 
l'kriture, 171 
Batatu, Hanna, 41 
Batista y Zaldivar, Fulgencio, 191 
Bayreuth Opera House, 117 
Beckett, Samuel, 17 
Beckford, William, 83 
Beethoven, Ludwig van, xxv, 113, 148 
Belgium, IC>, 61HS9, 134o 199, 119; colonialism, 
61HS9 
Benda, Julien, Zj', 303 
Bengal, ZlfJ, u6, 145, zso, 154 
Benjamin, Walter, 304o 309 
Bennett, William, 311; "To Reclaim a 
Heritage," 310 
Bentham, Jeremy, 133 
Bentinck, William, IO'J, 153 
Berger, John, 334 
Berlin Congress, 110 
Bernal, Martin, no, n8; Bltlck Alhmll. 1 s, 311 
Berque, Jacques, 119 
Bertram, Sir Thomas, 99 
Besant, Annie, 118 Index 
Bens, Raymond, 170 
Bhabha, Hom~ Jl7 
Bible, 310 
Blackburn, Robin, The OumlmYuJ af Colonial 
SitiTm;J, ~1846, 94""95, 140 
Blackmur, R. P • 1J1, 137, 238, 316 
Blake, William, IJ 
Bloom, Allan, 17, Jlo 
Blunt, Wilfred Scawen, 1o7, 195, 241 
Blyden, Edward Wilmot, 143 
Boer War, IJ4 
Bokassa, Jean Bede~ 12 
flonmiZII, J09 
B6ne (Annaba), 171 
Bopp, Franz, 197 
·Borges, Jorge Luis, 159, 176 
Boril GodtmOfJ, Ill 
Bossuet, Jacques Benigne, 197 
Bourdieu, Pierre, Sociologie Je I'Aigirie, 179 
Bourne, Randolph, 187 
Bowles, Paul, "A Distant Episode," 178 
Bowring, John, 167 
Boxer Rebellion, 196 
Boy Scouts, 10~, IJ'/38 
Bracken, Harry, 141 
Brahimi, Claude, 183 
Braithwaite, Edward, Jl3 
Brandt, Willy, 183; Brandt report 
(North-Solllb: A PrrJgrtmt for Stlrl!iwl). 
183-a4 
Brandinger, Paaick, 64 
Brazil, 89, 90, 17n8, 186 
· Brazza, Pierre Paul Fran~ois Camille 
Savorgnan de, 169 
Brennan, Timothy, 3o8 
British empire, xii, xvi, xxi, xxii, xxiii, )6, 
1· 9. 10, 11, 17, 16, J4· 6{, 69. 71, 76-f?. 89, 
90, 95, 98, roB, 133, 169, 171, 187, 198, 199, 
107, 119, 249, 15o, 151, 2j'{, 1.f9, z6o, 263> 
164, 166, 176, 18j', ~. 191, 311; repre­
sentations of British Raj, 11; and slavery, 
94""96; r« tdso names of countries; 
imperialism 
Brontl!, Charlotte, 79, 81; JiliN Eyre, 61, 66, 
74 
Brontl!, Emily, 81 
Brooke, Sir James, no 
Bruckner, Pascal, The Tearr of the Whirr 
Man,165 
Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 29J Buchan, John, lj'6, 163 
Budden,Julian, 113 
Bugeaud, Theodore, no, 169, 170, 18r-a1 
Bulwer-Lytton, First Earl of, 105 
Bunyan, Paul, Pilgrim 'r Progrrr, 138 
Burdick, Eugene (and William J. Lederer), 
Tht Ugly Arneri&~~•, 190 
Burke, Edmund, 9, 83, 133. 223-140, 253 
Burke, Kenneth, 303 
Burma, 73, 1o5, 199, 214. 119, 166 
Burnham, James, 191 
Bush, George, 36, 131, 193, 194, 198, 300 
Butler, Samuel, The Way af All Flerh, Jj'6, 187 
Butt, Isaac, 136 
Byron, George Gordon, 117 
Byzantium, 111 
Cabral, Am£1car, xix, 6o, 119, 114, 139, 148, 
174. 176-f7, 3or. "National Liberation 
and Culture," 175; "The Weapons of 
Theory," 17J' 
Cairo, 123, rq-29; Opera House, 115, n6, 117, 
126, 118, 119, 297; university, 30 5 
Calder, Angus, 211, u3; RmJI#tionary E111pi"' 
no 
Caldwell, Malcolm, 279 
Callas, Maria, 11j' 
Cambodia, 170, 198, zo8, 118 
Camaens, Luis de, 140 
Camp David Accords, 261 
Camus, Albert, xxvii, 66, 71, 78, 146, 1o8, 
110, 1.f9i appropriation of Algeria, 18,.; La 
Ch111e, 17 4. 178; ClwonifjtJel fllgirim•er, 176, 
178; L 'Etrtmgrr. 67, 16o, 161, 174"'76, 178, 
, 17~o, 181, 184-85; L 'Exil et le royaume, 
174, 1n, 178; "La Femme adult~re," 
176-fS. 183, 184; Nrmr, 178; and Orwel~ 
171"'73; La Pme, 174. dh; "Le Ren~gat," 
•78 
Canada, xi, xxvi, 5, 73> JOj', 198 
Canguihelm, Georges, 178 
Canny, Nicholas, So, no 
canon debate, 37 
capitalism, 94. Uj', 149, •6j', •?D• 311; 
colonial, 146; Islamic roots of in Egypt, 
41 
Carey, Peter, xvi 
Caribbean, the, xi, 8, 59, 61, 66, 71, 77, 83, 
~' 90, 93, 9{. 96, 98, 101, 190, 198, 111-13, 
118, ZZO, U{, 117, 141., 143, 14j'-{8, 2)1, Index 
Caribbean (continued) 
1.f3, 1.f6, 1.f7, 1.f9, 189, 30.f, 309, 313, 319; 
resistance to colonialism, 1.f3; ree alro 
Cesaire, ·Aim~; James, C. L. R. 
Carlyle, Thomas xiv, 9, 11, 71, 81, 101, IO.f, 
1o6, 130, 163; The Nigger Qgettion, J01--o1; 
"Occasional Discourse on the Nigger 
Qpestion," 101; Part and Prerent, 1o1 
Carpentier, Alejo, 176, 31.f 
Carter, Jimmy, 11, Z3.f 
Carrer, Paul, The RotJd to Botllny Bay, 
xv-xvi, 48 
Cary, Joyce, 63 
Casement, Roger, 107 
Castro, Fidel, 1.f3o 179, 31.f 
c;;elik, Zeynep, m 
Central America, xvii, .f.f, no, 187, 189, 314 
Cervantes, Miguel de, 47 
Qsaire, Aim~, 31, .f9, 114-1.f, n6, 131, 141,· 
143, z6z-63o 307; Cpbier d'un retour. 130'-31, 
z69, zSo, 181; Dircours sur k rolonialirm~ 
197, 166; Une Ttmphe, m 
Ceylon, 198, 199, z18 
Chaliand, G~rard, z6; 
Champlain, Samuel de, 169 
Champollion, Jean Fran~ois, 119, m; Lettrr 6 
M. Diicier. u8; Pmi1 du l)ltme 
hilroglypbiqu~ 118 
Changarnier, General Nicolas, 181 
Char, Ren~, 174 
Chareaubriand, Fran~ois de, 6o, 63, 197; 
· Afllkl, 97; Rmi. 97 
Chatterjej!, Partha, 117, z64, z6; 
Chaucer, Geoffi"ey, Canter/Jury Talet, 138 
Chauremps, Minister, 18o 
Chesnaux,Jacques, 179 
Chile, 116, 133, 187 
China, .f4, 73, IO.f, 194. 118, 111, 186, 189, 190, 
191, 300, 316; stereorypes of, xi 
Chinweizu, .fl, 197 
Chisholm, George, 47, 48, ZZ.f 
Chodkiewicz, Michel, 181 
Chomsky, Noam, .f, 17.f• 184. 186, 187, 301, 
303, 314 
Christianiry, Arab, 39"""41 
Clark, T. J., 111 
Clilford, Hugh, 167 
Clive, Robert, uo, '.f3 
Cloze~ 170 
Cochin China, 198 Cockburn, Alexander, 314 
Cockburn, Lord Chief Justice, 130 
Coetzee,J. M., 139 
Cohn, Bernard, iln Anthropohlgirt Among the 
Histori#nr, 109; "Representing Authoriry 
in Victorian India," 109 ; 
Cold War, xvii, xxiii, 47, 141, 181, z83, z8;, : 
z86, 190, 3oz, 314. 318 
Colebrooke, Henry, 1.f3 
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 81 
collaboration, xxiii, 161-63 
colonialism, 1o, 18, 11, 17, 36, 38, 4.f, 196, 103, 
107, 110, 1"f0, 141, 144, 14.f· 167, 169, 171, 
191, 316; defined, 9; resistance to, 39, 194, 
1000 10"f, Z.f30 171, 173 
Colonna, Fanny, 183 
Columbia Universiry, 46 
Columbus, Christopher, 111 
communism, 191, 3o6, 316; and 
decolonization, 17 
Communist Party, Third International, 
107 
comparative literature, origins in empire, 
43-61 
confinement, z6, 317, 33' 
Congo,1o7 
Congress of Ethnographic Sciences, 170 
Connolly,James, 114, 136 
Conrad, Joseph, xvi, 9, u, .f9, 6o, ~. 64o 67, 
68, 74-'!.fo 76, 78, 89, 100, 107, 131, 134, 1"f6, 
(f.f, l.f7, 163, 168, 188, 189, 193, 101, Zlo, 111, 
143, 17); "Geography and Some Ex­
plorers," 173; Htm1 of Dtuknets, 11-3o, 6o, 
6;, 67, 68-69. n. 93. no, 131, l.f 4. 160, 16"f, 
16.f, 166, 173. 139, zo8, 111, 177, 191, 31); 
Lord Jim, no, 131, 163-64; No.rtromo, xvii, 
xviii, xlx, xx, 16, 93, no, 131, 16;, 3z.3; 
A Perronal Record, 67; Victory, 163-64. 16; 
consent, manufacture of, 318 
Constant de Rebecque, Benjamin, Adolphe, 
17.f 
Constaf!tinople, 7 
"contrapuntal analysis," 18, 31, 43, .fl, 66-67, 
1111 114, 11.f, 146, 178, 194, 1.f9o 179, 181, 318, 
331, 336 
Cook, Captain James, xv 
Cook, Michael, HPglirinn, 160 
Cooper, James Fenimore, 63; The Deerstayer, 
138 
Coppola, Francis Ford, Apocalypre NO'UJ, xix Index 
Cornwallis, Lord, 1Jo 
Corry, John, 38-39 
Costa-Gavras, Constantin, Misring, xix 
Cowper, William, 140 
Creuzer, 111 
Cri Ju MgreT, 141 
Croce, Benedetto, 46, 49 
Cromer, Lord, IJI, 167, 169, 199; Anrinlt rmJ 
Modmrlmperiali.rm, 154 
Crone, Patricia, z6o 
Crosby, Alfred, 109; Ecologicallmpniglinn, 
11J· 
Crusades, 16, 77 
Cuba, xix, 17, 114. 164, 186, z87, 191 
cultural imperialism, 191 
culture, defined, xii, xiii, xi v; and economics, 
zoo; and extension of empire, 1o6; hetero­
geneity of, lf""l61 161, 117i and policies, zoo; 
and representadon, J6--J7, 66, 1oo · 
Cumberland, William Augustus, Duke of, 
94 
Curtin, Philip, The Image of A{ri&tz, 99, z1o 
Curtius, Ernst Robert, 44, 4Jo 47 
Cuvier, Georges, 134 
Cyprus, 196 
DtJ/M, 191 
Damascus, 197 
Dante Alighieri, xiii, 45, 189, 197; Divme 
Comedy, 47 
Danti:Jn, Georges Jacques, 146 
Darwin, Charles, 1oo, 134 
Darwish, Mahmoud, n6, 134. 3o6; "The 
Rose and The Dictionary," 131 
Dash,). Michael, H11iti 11m/ tiN United SfllteT: 
Nlltionlll SlnWIIyJKT 11m/ the Liter11ry 
lmllgirllltior~, 189 
Daudet, Alphonse, 71; Tm11rin de Tt~riUCOII, 
181, 183 
Daumier, Honore, 134 
Davidson, Basil, xx, 9!riOO, 196, Z09""1o, 139, 
140, 161, 164, 167, zn, 179, 307--o8; Africa 
in Modmr HiTtory, 117 
Davis, L. E. (and R. A. Huttenback), 
M11mmon 11m/ the Punuit uf Empil'l!, 6 
Davis, Lennard, 70 
Day, Clive, 167 
Deane, Seamus, 110, 118, 131, 136, 313-14; 
Celtic Revi'IJIII.r, 117 
, de Brosses, 83 decolonization, xii, xiii, xvi, xix, xxiii, 16, 
11, 17, 3Jo 68, 78, 134, 13Jo 161, 171, 194. 198, 
213, 119, zzo, u8, 130, 131, 136, 137)8, 141, 
1'43o 144. 1J00 1SJ1 1J6, 1J91 1711 176, 181, 
190. 192, 307, p6, 331; narrative of, 234. 
171; politics of, 147; and reclaiming 
geographical territory, 109 
Defert, Daniel, 110 
Defoe, Daniel, J2, 64o 7J, 77i C11ptain 
Smgleton, 70; Moll Flamlers, 70; Rohin.ron 
Cnuoe, xii, 70 
de Gaulle, Charles, 163 
Delacroix, Eugene, 9, no 
Delafosse, Maurice, 107 
Del.avigne, Robert (and Charles Andre 
Julien), LeT CtmTtructeurr de kl FrtJnee 
d'outre-mer, 169 
Deleuze, Gilles, 178, 33141 
Delhi, Imperial Assemblage in, 16 
DeLillo, Don, 314 
dependence, dynamic of, 16)64, 166, 183 
Derdour, H'sen, 171 
Derrida, Jacques, 178, 304 
De Sanctis, Francesco, 45, 46 
Deuription de I'EDfJte, 33-3J, 99, n8, 11~13 
Dessalines, Jean Jacques, zfS 
Dickens, Charles, 13, 47, 6o, 66, 71, 7Jo 77, 
791 81, 98, 10J, 131, 13J, IJ71 197, 30J1 318; 
BkiiJ: HoiiT~ 79; DllviJ CoppnjieJJ, xv; 
Dombey rmJ Son, 13-14. 63, 76; Gretit 
ExpectlltitmT, xiv, xv, xvi, xx, 6, 61-63o 74o 
93, 31Ji H11rd TimeT, 74 
Diderot, Denis, 140, 146, 18o 
Dilke, Sir Charles Wentworth, no, 166 
Dilthey, Wilhelm, 318 
Din, Khayr al-, 1J1 
Dinesen, Isak, 193 
Diop, Anta, 239 
discrepant experiences, 31-43 
Disraeli, Benjamin, Crystal Palace speech, 
71; Tt~nCI'I!d, 63 
Doctorow, E. L., 314 
Douin, Georges, Hutoil'l! du "tJ!e du Khedive 
lmlli~ 117 
Dower, Johri, 190 
Doyle, Arthur Conan, 63, 74, 78, IJ1,.1JJ 
Doyle, Michael, 9 
Drake, Sir Francis, 16 J 
Draneht Bey, 116, 119, 111, 117 
Draper, Theodore, 196 Index 
D'Souza, Dinesh, 311 
DuBois, W. E. 8., 114. 143, 1JJ, 164; The 
Sotdr of Blaelt Follt, 115 
du Lode, Camille, ll.f, n6 
Duncan,Jonathan, 153 
Dupleix, Joseph Fran~ois, no 
Duri, A. A., The HisflJTieal Formation of the 
Atwb Natio,, zp 
Durkheim, Emile, 1.f4 
Dun, Tora, 118 
Duvalier, Jean-Claude, 2.f6 
Dyurl). 291 
East Africa, IZ.f, 198, 199, 164 
East India Company, 14&--47 
East Indies, 199 
ecology, 1o, 11.f, 330 
education, xxvi, 10, 33o; Arab-Islamic, 167; 
colonial, 41, 1o1, 109, 113, 164; French, 
!So; liberal, J7; national systems of, w; 
United States, po; s« also universities 
Edwardes, Michael, The StJilm and the 
LOita, IJI 
Egypt, 36, 41, 63, 73, 98, 107, 198, 199, 114, ZIJ, 
118, 248, 1p, 161, z66, 167, 198, 199, 3oo, 
3o.f, p.r; in AidtJ. m-p; conquest of, 1o.r; 
General Charles Gordon, no; invasion 
of, JJ; Napoleon's expedition and survey, 
3J4.f; nationalism, 124; Wafd Party, 114 
Egyptology, 117'""19, 111, 114 
Eldridge, C. C., E,t)and's Mi.r.rion, 6 
Eliot, George, 71, 71, 77o IO.f, l3.f· I.f6, 19<f; 
Dll,itl Dmmrh, 63; Middltmanh, 14~44. 
187 
Eliot, T. S., 188, 131, 336; "Dry Salvages," 
:r.8t; "Incarnation," 181; "Linle Gidding," 
lJI; "Tradition and the Individual 
Talent," 4-5, 11, .f.f, 191; The WfJite Ltmd. 
189 
Elliot, Sir H. M~ IJI 
Elphinstone, Mountsruart, '53 
El Salvador, z66, z87 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 195 
empire, and academic disciplines, JO<-JI, IJI, 
19.r; and aesthetics, 6, 12-14. 14. 71, So, m, 
13o, 161; cultural argument for, 187; and 
culrural identity, 81, 106, 166, 111, 16<f; 
culrural integrity of, xxi-xxii, 9?-llo; 
discrepancy in experience of, 31-43; dissolution of and emergence of 
modernism, 1~; and geography, 6-14. 
1o, 48, .fo, .fl, 78. 81, .90'-91, 1o8, 1 J9, t6o, 
169, 18~ and history, zo-11, 168; 
integrative power of, 6; media 
representations of, 11, zs; and narrative, 
xii, 13, 18, 99, 131, IJ.f1 174-'{.f, 188; and 
nineteenth -century culture, 6, 8, 9, :r.o, 
6J-64, 68, 78, 81, 107, 161, 163. 16<f; and the 
novel, xii, 6, 14, 6z-8o, 81, 9.f, 101, zos; 
and representation, 1o6; resistance to, xii, 
xiii, ·,o, 30, .fl, 66, 81, 116, 18o, 186, 196, 197, 
199, zoo, 101, ZOJ, 110, 111, 139. 140, 14J• 
1.f4, 1j'8, 159, 17.f, 188; rhetoric of. xi, 
xvii, 9, 1.f, 107, 178, 159, 169; m also 
colonialism; imperialism; narrative; 
rhetoric of blame 
enclosure laws, 83 
Engels, Friedrich, 168 
England, xi, 11, 14, 43, 44. 4.J, j'l, 75, 76, 8J, 
93, 96, 101, 107, n8, 134. :r.z8, 131, 159 
Enlightenment, the, xv, 44o 140'""41, 146, po 
Enzenberger, 192 
essentialism, 16, 11, 37, Jl, 193. 1~, 261, 
307, 31o; theories of, JI-J1 
Ethiopia, 73. 116 
ethnography, 31, .fl, 74. 7.f, Ioi, 1o8, l.f1, 191, 
liD 
Etienne, Eugene, 169 
Eurocentrism, xx, 18, 30, 44. 111, 161, 177, 
Jll, J100 JJD ' 
exile, xxvi-xxvii, 317, 330, 334, 336 
exploration narrative, xii, 11o-11 
Eyre, E.)., no, 13o, 163 
Fabian, Johannes, 1o8, 161; LIJnflUif.e and 
Collmipl Po'Wtr, I09"'"1o; Time and the Other. 
4' 
Fagan, Brian, 11o 
Faidherbe, Louis Leon cesar, 170 
Faiz, Faiz Ahmad, 18, :r.z6, 243 
Falk, Richard, 187 
Falklands War, 11 
Fanon, Frantz, xix, xxvii, 11, 19, 39, 59, 6o, 
no, 146, 161, I8.f, 197, 107, 114, 119, 11J, 119, 
13.f"'36, 13?-JS. 141, 144t 148. 149. 1.fJ, 1.f8, 
159, 199, 307; theory of violence, 167-'11; 
Tbe Wreuhtd of the Emh. '9.f, 196, 11o, 
167-'{8, 134 Index 
fascism, 43. 316 
F aysal, King, 1+8 
feminism, xxiv, 178, Jzo, 311; and Middle 
Eastern Studies, xxiv 
Ferguson, Samuel, 136 
Fergusson, Francis, 43-44 
Ferry, Jules, no, 170 
Fetis, Fran~ois-Joseph, Hirtoirr: gmirak de Itt 
mtuilf~ d4puis ler tempt -rims .f 1161 jourr, 
11~1; Ro~n~~e philorophigru de J'biriDirr: de 
Itt mutiiJ~. 111 
Fevre, Lucien, 47; Lll Terre , J'evoluti1111 
bumaine, f8 
Field Day Company, 136, 313 
Fieldhouse, D. K, 6, 11 
Fielding, Henry, Tom Jones, 70 
Fielding, Vernon, I,SJ 
Field, James, Amm&ll -d the Metlitermne11n 
WorkJ, 194 
Filippi, 111-13 
Fiske, John, 188 
Flanagan, Thomas, 136 
Flaubert, Gustave, 9, 35, 6o, 66, 77o 78, 
roo, 16o, 163, 166; M11dt~me BoVIIry, 163; 
Smtimmtlll Eduelllitm, l.f6, 187; L11 Tmt~~tion 
de Sllint Antoine, 163 
Florida,1~ 
Fodeba, Keita, 174 
Forster, E. M., 63, 6J, 188, 107, 108; Ho'Wflrtls 
End, 65, 93; A P111sage I¥J l11dill, n, 75, IJI, 
189, zoo-o6 
Fortunato, Guistino, 49 
Foucault, Michel, 16, 41, no, 143, 178, 304, 
327, p8; Direipline find Punish, 164 
Fouillee, Alfred Jules Emile, 170 
Fourier, Jean-Baptiste- Joseph, introduction 
to Dmription de J'Egypre, 3345 
France, xii, xxi, 43, 44, 54, ,SJ, 67, 71, 74, 77• 
78, 86, 87, 90, 94r 1o6, 107, n6, 117, 134r 161, 
173> 174· ~~. 119, 116, 118, 144· 1.f6, 1.f9, 
16o, 163, 164, 165, 166, 171, 179, 181, 191, 
300; anti-imperialist policy, 141, 142; 
Declarations of the Rights of Man, 147; 
Egyptian survey, 3r-35; Franco-Prussian 
War, n6, 169; imperial coherence, xxii, 
xxiii; as imperial power, ,S"-6, 7, 9, 10, u, 
11, 13, 16, 63> 67, 83, 169, 191, 193, 19&--99, 
107, 109, 171, 189, 191; imperial Union, 
6+; nineteenth-century culture and novel of empire, 9']'-loo; Revolution, 
63, 170, 146, lJO, l.fl, 18o; under Nazi 
occupadon, 174; see also Algeria; 
Napoleon; names of authors 
Francis, Philip, 145, l.fO, 153, 154 
Frank, Andre Gunder, 6 
Frankfurt School, 178 
French Congo, 169 
Freud, Sigmund, 197, 166, 168-69, 178 
Friedman, Thomas, From Brirut to Jnwakm, 
161 
Friel, Brian, 31, 136; Trtm!lttti~~~~t, 116 
Frobenius, Leo, 193, 1o8 
Froude,James Anthony, no, 166 
Frye, Northrop, 118 
Fuentes, Carlos, 143, 176, 319 
Fukuyama, Francis, 159, po 
fundamentalism, xiii, 309"'"1o, 315, 317 
Gabon, 171 
Gaelicism, 117 
Gallagher, John, 73, 93 
Gallien~ Joseph Simon, 167, 169, 170 
Gandhi, Mohandas, 146, 117, 164r 176 
Garda M'rquez, Gabriel, xx, 143, 176, 198, 
329 
Garvey, Marcus, 124r uS, 164 
Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn, 71, 81 
Gellner, Ernest, 116 
Gendzier, Irene, Mallflging Politie.J Chtmge, 
190 
Genet, Jean, xx, 18J, 317 
geography, 16no, 181, 154; and culture, 
1-14, 47'""48, 78, 336; and history, 7; and 
identity, p-53, 330; and literary histOry, 
48; and narrative, J8, .f9, 84, 8J, ¢, IJ9, 
16o, 191, 179; and soc~al history, 49; see 
fllso empire; Gramsci, Antonio 
George, Katherine, 168 
George V, King, 134 
Germany, ro, 43, 44r J.f, u6, uS, 134, 199, 11jl, 
181, 3oo; empire, 66; and Jewish tradition, 
44 
Ger6me, Jean Leon, 100, no 
Ghana, 153 
Ghislanzoni, Antonio, 116 
Ghorbal, 116 
Gibbon, Edward, 83 
Gibran, Kahlil, 194 Index 
Giddings, F. H., 107 
Gide, Andre, xvi, 71, 78, 156, 1o8, 11o, 159; 
L 1mmortlliste, 161, 183, 191~3. 107; Retour Ju 
Tchatl, 107; V II.JIIge au Congo, 107 
Giosa, Nicola de, 115 
Giran, 170 
Girardet, Raoul, 9n8, 169, 107, 141; L 1Jie 
colonillle en France, 141 
Gissing, George; 156, 187 
Gladstone, William Ewart, 105-o6 
Glaspie, April, 301 
Gobetti, Piero, 49-50 
Gobineau,Joseph Anhur, Compte de, 1o8 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 45, 46. 195 
Goldsmith, Oliver, 56, 113 
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 55, 318-19 
Gordimer, Nadine, 139 
Gordon, General Charles, no 
Gould, Stephen Jay, 100 
Gouldner, Alvin, 311 
Gounod, Charles Fran~ois, 115 
Government of India, 147 
Goytisolo, Juan, xx 
Gramsci, Antonio, 31, 195, 136)7, 149, z66; 
The Prison Note6oou, 49; Qgademi, 49-50; 
"Some Aspects of the Southern Ques­
tion," 48-49, 51 
Gran, Peter; 41, 16o 
Grattan, Henry, 111 
Great Britain, 134. 174, 101, 147, 179, 181, 
i86, 3oo, 301, 317; anti-imperialist policy, 
141, 141; foreign policy, 71-'74, 196; see 
also British empire; England; Ireland 
Greece, ancient, 15-16, 194. 310 
Greek Onhodox Church, 40 
Green, Martin, 6o, 64 
Greene, Graham, xviii; Tbe Qgiet Americ1111, 
xix, 9, 190 
Grenada, 187 
Griaule, Marcel, 107 
Grima), Henri, 198, 199 
Groupe Coloniale, 169 
Guadeloupe, 198 
Guatemala, 187 
Guattari, Felix, 33141 
Guha, Ranajit, 175; A Rule of Propeny for 
Bengal, 109, 14 5-46, 149-51, 15)56, 158 
Guiana, 198, 186 
Guinea, 197, 119, 114. 164 
Guinea-Bissau, 168 Gulf War, xxiii, 4-5, 10, 36-37, 55, 131, 161, 
186, 191, 193, 195, 19B, 300, 301, 319, 314, 
315 
·Habermas,Jiirgen, 178 
Haggard, Rider, 63, 74. 78, 155, 156, 163; 
She, 187 
Haiti, 90, 114. 156, 166, 179, 189 
Halhed, Nathaniel, 153 
Hall, Stuart, 161, 178 
Hamer, Mary, 116 
Hardy, Georges, 47; direcror of Ecole 
Coloniale, 18-+; La PolititJMe colonillle et le 
ptlrlllge Ju tem aux X/Xe et XXe si«<es, 
184; recror of Academy of Algiers, 184 
Hardy, Thomas, 75, 131, 133; Jude the 
0/Jscure, 156-57, 187 
Harlem Renaissance, 141, 143 
Harlow, Barbara, Resislllnce Literlllure, 113, 
131 
Harmand,Jules, 17, no, 171; principle of 
domination, 170 
Harris, Wilson, 157, 313 
Hastings, Warren, 110, 153, 153 
Hawaii, 189 
Head, Bessie, 139 
Heaney, Seamus, 136 
Hegel, G. W. F., 197, 11o, 115, 145, 178; 
views of Orient and Mrica, 168 
Henry ll, 11o 
Henty, G. A., 155 
Herder, Johann Gottfried von, 44 
Herodotus, 113 
Hersh, Seymour, 314 
Hibben, Christopher, The Gre~~t Mutiny, 
146 
Hilferding, 5 
Hirschman, Albert 0., 188; The P1111itms and 
the lnterelll, 186-87 
historical narrative, 79 
history, xxvi, 35, 38, 41, 48, 51, 170, 191; 
experience of, xxii, xxv, 14, 31, 38, 4-+; 
and the novel, 93, 161, 104; and 
representation, 99; Third World, 11 
Hitchens, Christopher, 171, 314 
Hobsbawm, Eric, 7, 116, 114; (and Terence 
Ranger), The lti'Vtmtitm of Tmdititm, w-16, 
p, 109 
Hobson, J. A~ 5, 11, 71, 83o 107, 166, 187, 111; 
lmperilllism, 141 Index 371 
Ho Chi Minh, 196 
Hodgkin, Thomas, 114. 140, 161, 161, 
177, 179i Natirmalirm in Colonilll Afritll, 
131 
Hofstadter, Richard, 185 
Holland, 10, 55, 134. 199, 119, 141 
Hollywood, 309 
Holy Roman Empire, 45 
Homer, 33, 47, 310; Odyssey, 189 
Hong Kong, 6, 73, 198 
Hook, Sidney, 174 
Hopkins, Gerard Manley, "Pied Beauty," 
331 
Hountondjii, Paulin, 139 
Hourani, Alben, 147, 152, 163 
House, Karen Elliot, 191"""93 
Hugh of St. Victor, 335-36 
Hughes, Langston, 143 
Hughes, Robert, '314i The Flltlll Shore, xv, 
xvi 
Hugo, Victor, "Lui," 98 
Hulme, Peter, Colonilll En&ounters, 83, 
111 
Hun~~~nities in Ameri&tm Life, The, ·310 
Humbert,Jean, 119 
Humboldt, Wilhelm von, 46, 1o8 
Hume, David, 111 
Huntington, 190 
Husayni, Haj Amin al-, 148 
Hussein, Saddam, xxi, xxiv, 37, 13o, 119, 
191, 194, 1!)6, 197, 300, 301, 315, JZ8; 
represented as Arab Hitler, 195, 304 
Hussein, Sherif, 147, 148 
Hutchins, Francis, 103; The /Husion of 
Permtmen&e: British lmperitllirm in lndill, . 
149 
Huttenback, R. A (and L E. Davis), 
M11mmon 11nd the Pursuit of Empire, 6 
Huxley, Aldous, 130, 191 
hybridity, xiii, 317, 335 
Hyde Park Riots, 130 
identity, 175, 311, 315; American, xxv,. xxvi, 
51-53, 31o; Arab, xxv, xxvi; Arab-Islamic, 
151; Arab Protestant, 4o; British, 51, 71, 
1os; Caribbean, 157; and culture, xii, xiii, 
xxv, 51, zzz; and empire, 336; French, 
51-53, 171; Irish, 136; and language, 113, 
11 s; loss of, 178; and mass media, 37i and 
nationalism, 199; politics of, 314 IHusioiiS perdues, 6 
I Love Lucy, 309 
"imperialism," as act of geographical 
violence, 115; as educational movement, 
zzJ; defined, _s'-11, 51, 16z; high, 7, 36, 168, 
ZZij modern, XX, 5--f>, 11, 351 ZZI 
lnden, Ronald, /""'fining lndill, uo 
India, xi, xiv, xx, xxi, xxiv, 6, 9, u, 14, 15, 
16, 17, 16, 17, 34-35, 36, 51, 64, 7o, 71, 7J, 
77, 93, 97, 98, 99, 108, m, u8, 115, 163, 165, 
168, ry6, 190, 194. 199, 114, 117, 118, 119, 
1101 128, 1421 249, 250, 251, 254, 159, 264, 
267, 276, 182, 312, 313, 317, 318, 321, 323, 329; 
Act of Permanent Settlement, 145, 
25o; Anglo-French competition in, 83i 
and British artists, xiv, 11, 81; Congress 
Party, 199, 124i education, 42, 1o9; 
independence and partition, 13), media 
representation of, 28; national epics, 19), 
nationalism, 2o)06, 215, 224; oppositional 
histories of, 24o; represented· by Bronte, 
66, 74i represented by Forster, 75, 189, 
2oo-o6; repr~enred by Kipling, JZ, 75, 
78, 132-f>1, 167, 20'fi represented by 
Naipaul, 217; represented by Thackeray, 
74. 76; resistance to empire, 2o1, zo3; 
stereotypes of, xi; see tJso Chatterjee, 
Panha; Guha, Ranajit; Kipling, Rudyard; 
Naipaul, V. S. 
Indian Mutiny, 105, 146--48, 206; see fllso 
Indian Rebellion 
Indian National Congress, 135 
Indian Rebellion, 1857, 96, 135,' 146 
Indochina, 27, 170, 198, 2o8-os1, 241, 290 
Indonesia, 199, 218, 23o, 249, 255, 287; armed 
resistance in, xii 
inftuence, defined, 191 
Inkle, 212 
interests, docrrine of, 186--87, 188 
International Cc;>mmission for the Study of 
Communication Problems (M11ny Voi&es, 
One World), 191 
International Congo Association, 165 
International Congress of Colonial 
Sociology, 170 
Iran, xix, 11, 17, 230, 175, 287, 310, 322, 314. 
326; hostage crisis, 21, 23s; Islamic 
Revolution, 30, 261, 177. 306, 334i. Shah of, 
300 
Iran-Iraq War, 296 372. Index 
Iraq, xix, 4-5, ~o, 36--37, 131, 151, 275, 186, 
18?, 18!1, 2!11, 1!13· 195. 196, ~97. 198, 199. 
301, 303""04 
Ireland, xi, xv, p, 71, 73, 8o, 83, 8.q., 98, 1o6, 
130, 134o 198, n8, 313; Act of Union, n6; 
armed resistance in, xii; Easter uprising, 
nr, Home Rule movement, 136; 
nationalism, 114, 217, 236; Ordnance 
Survey of,· n6; represented by Spenser, 
7, 211, 136; represented by Yeats, 16, 
no-38, 264; Sinn Fein Party, 214; 
stereotypes of, xi 
Irish Revival, 114 
lriye, Akir~ 190 
Islam, xxiv, 34o 37, 39, 194o 119, 2.q.8, 2p, 16o, 
~63, 300, 305, 306, 307, 317; American 
representations of, 19 f, fund &mentalism, 
34o 114o 230, 308; Orientalist description 
of, xi; Revolution, 30 
lslamocentrism, xx, xxiv 
Ismail, Khedive, 115, 119, 11o, 115-19 
Israel, JS, 145, 26o, 161, 187, ~~ 199, 301, 306 
Istanbul, xxii, 47, 116 
Italy, 1o, 44o 49-50, 114, 116, 1n, 134, zoo, 
~82, 3~3 
Jabarti, 'Abd al-Rahman al-; 151, 175; :4ja'i6 
al-Atbar, 33"'"35 
Jabry, Mohammad Abed al-, 151 
Jackson, Andrew, 188 
Jamaica, 52, 105, 13o; stereotypes of, xi 
James, C. L. R., xix, xxv, 54, 94o ~19, ~42, 
~43, 159, 179, z8o, 281, 188, 313, 328; The 
Blaek Jaco!Jmr, z4s-48, 151-p, 156-61, 177; 
Hirtory of Negro Revolt, 1J3, Z5j, NltrutiiiUJ 
and the G/Nma Rnmlution, 153 
James, Henry, 75, 76, 134o 157; The POI1rllit of 
a Ltzdy. 63. 143-44o 156, 187 
James, William, 187 
Jameson, Fredric, 304, 313; The Politkal 
Umonr&iotu, 73 
J span, 6, 194o ~o1, 118, 111, 190, 291, 306, 319 
Jayawardena, Kuma~ Femininn allll 
Natitmalinn in the Third World, 118 
Jefferson, Thomas, 31o 
Jewel in the CI'UIIIn, The, ~~ 
Jinnah, Muhammad Ali, 1951 
Johnson, Lyndon Baines, z86 
Johnson, Samuel, 1515. 140 
Jones, Gareth Stedman, 64 Jones, Sir William, 83, 133. 153 
Jonson, Ben, 8~ 
Jordan, 36 
Joy, G. W~ 11o 
Joyce, James, 157, 11J-14; A P011r11it of the 
Artist 111 a Young Man, 114; Ulyrrer, 1881 
18!1, 111 
Julien, Charles Andr6, 107; (and Robert 
Delavigne ), Ler C11111ttwtet.~rr de Ia Fran&e 
d'outre-mer, 1651 
Jung, Carl, ~31 
Kader, Emir Abdel, 181, 195. 1517, 175 
Katb, Franz, 159 
Kant, Immanuel, 58 
Kartini, Raden, 218 
Karve, D. K~ 118 
Kautsky, 5 
Keats, John, 1~51 
Kedourie, Elie, 116 
Kennan, George, 18f 
Kennedy, Paul, 3151; TIH Rire allll Filii oftiH 
Great Plfllln'.r, f 
Kenya, 18, np, 130, 166, 174 
Kerman, Joseph, Opml111 Dr1111111, 113 
Kernan, Alvin, 321 
Khalidi, Rashid al-, z6o 
Khomeini, Ayatollah, 17, ~!171 306, 327, 318 
Khoury, Bishara al-, 1516 
Khoury, Elias, 3151 
Kiberd, Declan, 136 
Kidd, Benjamin, 100 
Kiernan, V. G., 8, 6o, 8o, s~. 105, 187, 188, 
z89, 301; The Lordr of H111111111 Kind, 15, 151; 
Marxirlfland lmperiaiinn, 65 
Kimball, Roger, 311 
Kincaid,Jamaica, 317 
Kingsley, Charles, West'lllllrd Hoi, 6~ 
Kingsley, Mary, 141 
Kinkead-Weekes, Mark, 144 
Kinney, Leila, 111 
Kipling, Lockwood, 133 
Kipling, Rudyard, xvi, xxi, 9, 351> 6o, 63, 6.q., 
66, 7415· 8~, 8!1, 100, 110, !63, 1&,, 187, 1!17. 
104, 107; awarded Nobel Prize, 133; 
Captain; C1111ragmw, 1p.; as journalist, 133; 
TIH Jungle Book, 131; Kim. xxi, n, 32, 56, 
6f, 67, 75· 78. 85, 131-61, 188; Tbt Ligbt 
Tbat Failed, 131; "Lisbeth," 140; S0111etbi"g 
of Myrelf 133; Slllilry allll Co., 131 Index 373 
Kirkpatrick, Jeane, 17 
Kissinger, Henry, 188 
Knox, Robert, 134 
Kolko, Gabriel, 5, 187 
Koran, 34o 167, 313 
Korea, 8, zpo, 1p1, 316 
Kotzebue, August von, LowrJ'' VtnUs, 
86 
Krupat, Arnold, 304 
Kundera, Milan, 329 
Kuwait, ;, zo, 36, 131, zpJ, 1p6, 199, 301; m 
aho Gulf War 
Labourer, 107 
Lacheraf, Mostafa, 181-81 
Lagerlof, Selma, 133 
La Guma, Alex, 139 
Lamartine, Alphonse de, 63, zo 5 
Lamming, George, 113, 157, 176, 3'3 
Landes, David, Ban~ tmtl Ptubru, 116; The 
Uwb01md Prmretbnu, 9-1o 
Lane, E. W., 111 
Lang, Jacques, 191 
Langland, William, 8z 
language, 124, u7; African, 113; Arabic, zn, 
1,.S, 167; and colonialism, 171; English, 
1oz, 30)'""06, 311; French, 311; and identity, 
113. 115; mutilation of, z;8; and national 
culture, z•;; of power, 1 ;p; theories of, 
178 
Laos, 17o, 1p8 
Laqueur, Walter, 161 
La Rouci~re, Admiral, •69 
Laroui, Abdullah, 183, 177 
La Scala, If? 
Las Casas, Bartolome de, 140 
Lasswell, zpo 
Larin America, xxii, 5, 8, 19, s;, 81, If1, 111, 
ZIJ"-14, 118, 113, Uf, 13J, 175, 301, JZJ; 
represented by Conrad, xvii-xx, 15, 165, 
J66 
Lawrence, D. H., 188 
Lawrence, T. E., 63, 188, 191, 108, 163; The 
Sewn Piilllrr ufWudtm~, no, r;;, I«So-6r, 
189, 151 
Lean, David, A PIISsage trJ India, 11 
Lebanon, xx, 39, 198, 161, 198; Civil War, 
Z3f, 309 
Le Bon, Constave, 170 
Lebow, R. N., no Lederer, William J. (and Eugene Burdick), 
The Ugly Amerie1111, zpo 
Leerssen, Joseph, zzo; Mere Irish and 
Fior-Ghael. 137 
Leeward Islands, 90 
Lefeber, Walter, 5 
Leiris, Michel, 107 
Lenin, Vladimir Jlyich, 5, 111 
Le Noury, 16p 
Leopold, King, 16;--66 
Lerner, zpo 
Leroy-Beaulieu, Paul, 47, 107, no, 170, 186, 
171 
Lesseps, Ferdinand de, Jzo 
Levant, the, 83 
Levin, Harry, 73 
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 151, 277 
Lewis, Anthony, 291413 
Lewis, Bernard, 3f311, z61; The PolitieaJ 
L1111pge of lsltlm. z6o 
Lewis, Gordon K~ 161; Slavery, Imperialism, 
""' FrlllliOIII, 65, 76, ZfO 
Liauzu, Claude, Aux Originu de;­
titrNfiiJtHlismes: Coltmisls et t~t~ti-eoltmillluteJ' 
m Frtmee (lJIJ>-11~). 165 
liberation and liberation movements, 16, 17, 
lpJ, 171/p, 181, 304. 305, 3J11 334; politics 
of, 16 
Libya, 36, 175, 187, 18p, 306, 317 
Limerick, Patricia, 63 
Lindenberger, Herbert, Opml.· The 
Extrawgant Art, m 
literature, 41, 45, 47, p; comparative, 43-61; 
European,¥; United States, 46; world, 
45""'48 
Livingstone, David, •87 
London, xiv,. xvi, 15, 1p, 40, 71, 79, 9o, 141, 
144 
Loti, Pierre, xvi~ 71, 78, 181; L 1nde (saru ks 
Anglau), 18p; Le R1111111n t/'1111 Spt~hi, 187 
Lottman, Herbert, '74 
Loutfi, Martine, Lillrlltun et eoltmialisme, 18z 
Louvre, 110 
Lowe, Lisa, Critieal TtJ'TIIins, xxiv 
Lugard, Frederick, 14 
Lukacs, Georg, nJS, 84, p8, 187, 115, 171, 
~73. 304i Hinory ll1ld Class Omsewumess, 
49, 17o; The Theory of the Now/, 1;6-57, 
l$9 
Luxemburg, Rosa, 5, 111 374 Index 
Lyautey, Huben, no, 167, 169, ryo 
Lycurgus, 33 
Lyotard, Jean-Fran~ois, :6, 57, 151, 318 
Lytton, Lord, 16 
Macaulay, Thomas Babington, 78, 1oz, 109, 
133, 196; Minute on Indian Education, 99 
MacDonald, Ramsay, 141 
MacKenzie, John M., Propaganda and 
E"'fJiiT, 150 
Madr.inder, Halford, 47, 115; lectures on 
imperialism, 13 
MaeNeii/Lelmr NnDtHour. 193 
Madagascar, 169, 170, 171, •98, 114 
Magdolf, 5 
Mahan; Admiral, 186 
Mahfouz, Naguib, 37, 306 
Mahood, Molly, 64 
Maine, Sir Henry, 1o8; Andmt Law, 16~ 
Rede Lectures, 16~ Village Communitier, 
164 
Malaysia, 198, 199, 111, 145, 249, 255 
Mali, 197 
Malouf, David, xvi 
Malraux, Andre, 71, 78, 188, 191; as amateur 
ethnographer-archeologist, 2o8; La Voie 
roya/e, no, 155, 183> lOJ-09 
Malti-Douglas, Fedwa, Woman'r /Jotly, 
Womani Wurlt/, xxiv 
Mandela, Nelson, 198 
Manet, Edouard, m 
Mangan, J. A., The Gamer Ethic and 
Imperialirm, 138 
Mangan, James Clarence, 236 
Manifest Destiny, 285, 188 
Mann, Thomas, Death in Vmice, 188, 192 
Maori, 105 
Marcos, 300 
Marcuse, Herbert, 291 
Mariategi, Jose, 114 
Mariette, Auguste, ns--18, 1zo--z2, 116 
Markham, James, 235 
Marti, Jose, 114. 114. 143, 164 
Martineau, Harriet, 133, 101 
Martinique, 171, 131 
Marx, Karl, 6, l.fl, 164, 168, 197, 115, :66, 
1~9. 177, 278, 281 
Marxism, 49, 65, 194. 199, 11o, 166, 170, 178, 
JZO, Jll 
Mas, Sinbaldo de, ·.246 Masonry, 119, 12o 
Massignon, Louis, 163 
Matisse, Henri, no, 142 
Manelart, Armand, 291, 309 
Maugham, Somerset, 82 
Mau Mau,13o 
Maunier, ·Rene, The Sodolog;y uf Cokmier, 17o 
Maupassant, Guy de, 71, 139; Bel-Ami, 109, 
18z 
Mauritania, 170 
Mauritius, 90 
Ma'UIIItjif, 313 
Mayer, Arno, 283 
Mazrui, Ali, 38-39, 139, 261 
McBride, Sean, 191; Repon, 192; tee alto 
International Commission for the Study 
of Communication Problems 
McCaughey, Roben, lntemational Studier 
and Academic Enterprire: A Chapter in the 
Enr:loture of American Leamin& 321 
McClure, John, 64 
McCormack, W. M, 136 
McGeoghehan, Abbe, 136 
McKay, Claude, 143 
McKeon, Michael, 70 
McMahon, Sir Henry, 247 
McNeill, William, The Purruit uf Power, 8 
media, 11, 3~37, 302-o3, 309, 318, 311, 317, 
329; and cultural imperialism, 191"""91 
Melbourne, xv 
Melville, Herman, 63; Moby-Dick, 188, 195 
Memmi, Alben, xx, 59, 171 
Meredith, George, 105, 156, 187 
Merle, Marcel, L 'Anticolonialirme Europlm de 
Lar Carat a Karl Marx, 240 
Mesopotamian civilization, 297 
metropolitan cultures, 35· 51-53. 59. Jo8, 161, 
zoo, 116: 143· 144> 2 .fl 
Metropolitan Opera, New York, 114 
Michelet, Jules, 78 
Middle East, xi, xix, xxiv, 5, 8, 14, .f.f, 73, 
198, 139, 145, z6o, 194> 295, 196, 197, 300, 
301, 314; tee alto names of countries 
Middle East Studies Association, z6o-61 
migration, theme of, 308, 331 
Mill, James, 9, 99, 133, 167 
Mill, John Stuart, 9, 71, So, 81, 99, 102, 105, 
130, 133. 163, 167, 205; Principler uf Political 
&onomy, 59, !)0, 91 
Mille, 71 Index 375 
Miller, Christopher, Bllln~ Darknm, 38 
Miller, David, The Novel and the Polift, 73 
Mills, C. Wright, 314 
Milton, Joh!J, 305, 315 
Mirabeau, Honore Gabriel Riqueti, 246 
missionaries, 39-41, 193, 249 
Mitchel, John, 136 
Mitchell, Timothy, 16o; Coltmizing Eg;ypt, 111 
Mitterrand, Fran"t<>is, Prtrme~ franfilist et 
abondon, 178 ' 
Miyoshi, Masao, 290, 319-30; As We Saw 
Tbertl, 161-63 
Mobaralc, Ali Pasha, Kbittat Tawfikiyll, 119 
Mobutu, Sese Selco, 265 
modernism, 330; and dissolution of empire, 
18~o, 141, 243 
Moi regime, 230 
Monroe Doctrine, 185 
Montagu, Lady Wortley, 99 
Montaigne, Michel de, 47, 97 
Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondat, 
240 
Moore, George, 156 
Moore, Thomas, 136 
Moorhouse, Geoffrey, 155 
Moraze, Charles, 70 
Morocco, 36, 130, 251, 166, 3o6 
Morris, William, 241 
Morrison, Toni, Beloved, 334i Tar Baby, 334 
Mountbatten, Earl of Burma, 163 
Mozambique, xxii 
Mubarak, 36 
Mudimbe, V. Y, 239; The lnvmtion qf Afriea, 
193 
Miiller, Max, 100 
Multatuli, 240 
multiculturalism, xiii, xxvi, 300, po, 331 
Mu.nif, Abdelrahman el, 18, 3o6; Cities qf 
Salt,194 
M1,1nro, Thomas, 153 
Murchison, Sir Roderick, 164, 165, 166 
Murphy, Agnes, 169 
Mus, Paul, Viet-Nam: Soeiologie d'ullt! OJerre, 
10&-o9 
Muslim League, 199 
Naipaul, V. S., xviii, 19, 11, J'h 117, 157, 166, 
171, 304, 313; Among the Believm, 165; 
A Bmd ;, the River, xix, 165; Gumillas, 
165 Napoleon Bonaparte, 58, 63, 76, 97, 98, 99, 
151, 279, 28o; expedition to Egypt 33-35, 
u8, 119, 126 
Napoleon Til, 127.-183 
narrative, 274; Arab, 115; and culture, xx; 
and empire, xii, xiii, 13, 16-27, 28, 58, 
62-8o, 99, 132, 163, 174-m and identity, 
xii, xxvi, 237, 315; and moral order, 79; 
official, 315, 324; and power, 173; ue also 
names of authors 
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 116, 179, n4 
National Defense Education Act, 47 
National Endowment for the Humanities, 
38, 310 
nationalism, xxiv, 16, 19, 11, 31, 36, 39, 41. 43, 
44, Jl, 54, 58, 66, 18 5, lOJ-06, 107, 209, 
116-19, 123, 224. 127, u8, n9, 143, 148, 151, 
2JJ, 157, z6o, 261, 264. 165, 266, 269, 171, 
176, 179, 199, 305, 307, 312, 315, p8, Wi 
Arab, 196, 298; and identity, xii, xiii, 
xxvi, 267; 199; and liberation movements, 
Hi and literacy, 299; and literary study, 
316; Middle Eastern, xxiv; narrative of, 
273; patriarchal cast of, 124; Third 
World, xxiv, 209 
nativism, 42, n8, 230, 131, 275, 176, 307, 318, 
325; and identity, 119; ru also nationalism 
Ndebele,Shona uprising, 198 
t~igrittule, 16, 214. 224, u8, 229, z48, 18o, 307 
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 117, 124, 163, 164. 176 
Neill, Stephen, Colollialism and Cbristia11 
Missions, 166 
Neruda, Pablo, 31, u6, 132; "El Pueblo,'' 
13J-34i "Deber del Poeta," 234 
Nerval, Gerard, 9, 35 
New Caledonia, 198 
New Guinea, 198 
New World Information Order, 191 
New York, xxvii, 19, 40 
Nn» York Times, The, 38, 235, 192 
New Zealand, xxvi, 5, 73> 105, 198, ZZI 
Ngasse, 73 
Ngugi wa Thiongo (James), xx, 18, 30, 174, 
305; Deeolonising the Mi11d. 113; The River 
Betwem, 110 
Nicaragua, xix, 55, 287, 189 
Niebuhr, Reinhold, 195 
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 6o, zo8, 166, 
168-69, 177 
Nigeria, 76, 198, 166 Index 
Nimr, Faris, 1~ 
Nitze, Paul, 193 
Nixon, Richard, 186 
Nkrumah, Kwame, 114. 143, 1.f3 
Noriega, Manuel, 300 
Nonh Africa, 9, 13, 71, no, 18o, 192, 193, 199, 
114, 189 
North America, Anglo-French competition 
in, 83 
Nonh-South relationship, 17, 119, 28)84 
novel, and aesthetics of empire, 7.f, 191; 
Arabic, 37; and decolonization, 139; and 
empire, xii, xv, xxii, 14. 3.f, .fl, .f3, 61-So, 
81, 9$1 l.f.f, 1.f9, 176, 101, 1o.f, 1o8; and 
national identity, 78 
Nye, Joseph, 319, 313 
Nyerere, Julius, 198, 114 
O'Brien, Conor Cruise, .f4> 173, 174, 184. 1.f8, 
16.f 
O'Brien, Justin, rranslator of Camus, 177 
O'Brien, Patrick, 6 
O'Connel~ Daniel, 136 
occidentalism, 310 
O'Grady, Standish, 136 
oil, zo, 301, 33o; and Middle Eastern 
prosperity, 199"""3oo 
O'Leary, 231 
Omar, Hajji, 197 
opera, 81, 111-Jz, 191 
Opera, uz 
Operation Desen Storm, 194. 197, 198, 3o1; 
set tdst1 Gulf War 
Orabi uprising, 19.fo 198, 161 
Orient, xvi, 3.f, 44. 116, 146 
Orientalism, xxiv, 17, p, 41, 44. ~ • .flo 74. 
99, no, 111 
Oriental Renaissance, 194 
Orwell, George, u, 17, 63, 78, 8z, l.fO, 18s, 
191; and Camus, 17113 
Ortoman Empire, xxii, 39, m, 114. 147, 
163 
Owen, Roger, 116, 117 
Oxford, 19 
Pacific Rim states, z84 
Padmore, George, 143, 2.f3 
painting, 99, 111, 166 
Pakistan, 18, 27, 36, 199, 116, 130, 131, z66, 
3o6, Jl.f, 316 Palestine, 17, 36, 39, 119, 114. 116, l4.f, z6o, 
164, 194, 198, 199, 31T, inti{u11, 1.f7, 161, 
3"· 316 
Palestrina, Giovanni Pierluigi da, 113 
Palinerston, Henry John Temple, no 
Pan-Africanism, 214. 141 
Panama, z86, 287, 289 
Pan-Arabism, 114 
Panikkar, K. M., A.ria and Wtstern 
Domi~~t~nce, 114 
Pareto, Vilfredo, 154 
Paris, l.f, '" 79, 99, ns-16, 125, •n. 141, z44; 
International Exhibition, 119 
Parnell, Charles Stewart, 232 
Parry, Benita, 189, 104; Dehnitmr anti 
Disrowries, 201 
past, images of, 3(, 1,)'-19, 2o, 31, 36 
Patai, Raphael, 261; The Arwb Mi,J, 16o 
patriotism, rhetoric of, .fS; see lllso empire; 
nationalism 
Paulin, Tom, 136 
Pavlidis, Pavlos, see Draneht Bey 
Pearse, Patrick Henry, 214 
Persia, 73, IO.f, uS, 194. 297 
Philippines, xix, 8, 64, 214, 118, 130, 246, 
2491 17.fo 289, 316 
Physiocratic philosophy, 24.f, zn 
Picasso, Pablo, 188, 241 
Pinochet Ugane, Augusto, 300 
Pipes, Daniel, 161 
Piroli, Giuseppe, 11.f 
Plato, 49 
Platt, D. C. M., ,S, 19o; Fi~~t~~~ce, T'17111e anti 
Politics in British Foreign Poli&;y, rlrJ-rJI-f, 
71/4 
Pocahontas, 111 
Podhoretz, Norman, 171 
poetry, 191 
Poiret, Ab~. Lettrts Je 8/IIHrie 
Pol Pot regime, 274 
Policy Planning Stalf, z8s 
political theory, 8o 
politics, 318; and aesthetics, 28, 101, n8; 
and art, 3o8; and culture, 18, 139; and 
identity, 219, 267, 314; and rhetoric, zs8; 
and social sciences, 1 H 
Poliziano, Angelo, 197 
Poner, Andrew, "3 
Porter, Bernard, 166; Critics of Empil'lf, 
141 Index 377 
Portugal, xxii, 1o, fJ, 74, 83, 89, 134. 199, 211, 
141, 154, 17$; empire, xxii, 66 
post-modernism, 319; and consumer 
culture, 313 
Pound, Ezra, 188 
Pratt, Mary Louise, z1o-u 
print-capitalism, 115 
Prochaska, David, 171 
Proust, Marcel, 47, 84, 156, 188, 328 
Pryce-Jones, David, The Clorwl Cin:lt, z6o 
Psichari, Ernest, 71, 78, 182 
psychology, 170 
Puritans, American, 63 
Pye, 190 
~ddati, Muammar al-, 165, 315 
~der, Abdel, 110 
quest narrative, 30, 110 
racism, xxi, 316 
RadcliiFe, Ann, 76 
Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford Bingley, 154 
Rafi', 116 
Ragarz, Lowell Joseph, The Filii of the 
Pltl11ttr Clas.r in the Britirb Caril!kan, 
J71J-ti.J.J, 94 
Raleigh, Sir Walter, 165 
Ramabai, Pundita, 118 
Ranger, Terence, 198, 140, 161; (and Eric· 
Hobsbawm), The lii'UtllriDII of Tratliti1111, 
1)16, p,1Q9 
Raskin, Jonah, The M,1tholtJg;, of lmperitdinn, 
65 
Rastafarianism, 218 
Raynal, AbM, 83, 97, 14o, 1¢ 
Reade, Charles, 155 
Reagan, Ronald, z84o 310, 317, 318 
Renaissance, 195, 197, 210, 191 
Renan, Ernest, 44, 1oo, 1o8, 163 
resistance, culture of, xii, 30, 53, 109'"""1o, 
zz4o n6, 219, 143, 166-67, 174. 176, 178, 
304, 311, 317, 33o; literature of, 30, 214, 115, 
131, 143, 174. 176; .rn: td.ro colonialism, 
resistance to; empire, resistance to 
Retamar, Roberto Fernandez, 113 
revisionism, xxiv-xxv, 11, 41, 140, 143, 175, 
187 
Reynolds, Joshua, Dircourses, 13 
Rhee, Syngman, 3oo 
rhetoric of blame, 18, 39, 81, 96 Rhodes, Cecil, 14, no, 166 
Rhys, Jean, WiJtt Sargauo Sm, 93 
Richardson, Samuel, 7o; Clarissa, 70 
Richelieu, Cardinal, 169 
Richetti, John, 70 
Richter, Melvin, 183 
Ricordi, 11)17 1 111 
Rimbaud, Arthur, 1o8 
Robbins, Bruce, 63 
Roberts, Warren, 87 
Robeson, Paul, 148 
Robespierre, Maximilien-Fran~ois-Marje-
lsidore, 146, 18o 
Robinson, Paul, Opml tmtl ltlm.r, 113 
Robinson, Ronald, 73, z6z 
Robinson-Gallagher controversy, 6 
Rockefeller Foundation, 310 
Rodinson, Maxime, z6o, 179 
Rodney, Walter, xix, 197, 148, 153; Hll'lll 
E11mpe Untltrtlew/bpetl Africa, 59 
Rod6, Jose Enrique, llf; Arie~ 176 
Rogin, Michael Paul, 63 
Roman Empire, 7, 154. 211, 186 
. Roosevelt, Theodore, z88 
Rostow, Walt Whitman, 19o 
Roth, Philip, zn 
Rouge, Emmanuel, u8 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 44. 6o, 971 140, 
146, z8o 
Roy, Ramuhan, 118 
Royal Geographical Society, 164 
Rushdie, Salman, xx, u, 17, 31, 143, 317, 319; 
Mitl~tigbt's Cbiitlrm, 216, l3f; The Sattmic 
VtrltfS, 17, 11, 18, 306, 308, 310, 318 
Rusk, Dean, 186 
Ruskin, John, xiv, 9, 11, 79, 105, 130, 161, USJ, 
1ry; Slade Lectures, 1oz-o4 
Russia, 6, 10, 44. 71, 98, 134. 150, 165; 
empire, xxii 
Sabry, Muhammad, 116, 117 
Sadat, Anwar, 195 
Said, Ali Ahmed, ree Adonis 
Said, .Edward, OrimtrJism, xi, xii, xxii, xxiii, 
xxiv, xxv, 41, 54· 195 
Said, Nuri as-, 196 
St Pierre, Bernardin de, 140 
Saint-Sai!ns, Charles Camille, Samr1111 anti 
Delilah, 110 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri, 110 Index 
Salan, 181 
Salih, Tayeb, 174-317; Season of Migrtllion to 
the Nonb, Jo, 111 
Samory, 197 
Samuel, Raphael, 312 
Sanskrit, 195, 197, 305 
Santo Domingo, 195, 251, 279 
Sarraut, Albert, 17o; Grtlnrkur et seruitude 
roltmitdes, 184 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 181, 196, 197, 241, 178, J04-
J18 
Saudi Arabia, 18, 36, 251, 294, 197, 300 
Saussure, Leopold de, 170 
Scandinavia, 2Bz 
Schiller, Herbert, 291, 309 
Schlegel, August Wilhelm von, 44 
Schlegel, Friedrich von, 44-197 
Schlessinger, Arthur, Tbe Disuniting of 
Amni'a, xxvi 
Schumpeter,Joseph, 5, 72, 121 
Schwab, Raymond, 194--95; Tbe Orim111l 
Rmtziss~e. u8-ISJ 
Scott, Sir Walter, 75· n. 78. 117, '35· 115 
Seal, Ani!, Tbe Emergm« of lndi1111 
Nt~tiot~t~li.rm, 10_5-06 
Second International Congress of 
Geographical Sciences, 169-7o 
Seeley,}. R., 6, 9, 53, 71, 107, no, 166, 169, 
186, ISJ, 188 
Segalen, 71, 183 
Seill~re, Ernest, 170 
Selassie, Haile, 3oo 
. Semidei, Manuel, 18o 
' Senegal, 17o, 219, u8, 241 
Senghor, Leopold, 196, 114-n8, 131, 143o 162 
separatism, see nationalism 
Shaarawi, Huda, 118 
Shakespeare, William, xiii, 47, 51, 79, 157, 
197, 3o5, 31o; Tbe Tempest, 11:1-14 
Shan, Sher, 159 
Sharabi, Hisham, 152 
Shariati, Ali, 30· m 
Sheikh, Jamal Ben, 329 
Shipler, David, Artlb 11nd Jew. 261 
Sick, Gary, All Filii Down, 135 
Simpson, Senator Alan, 195 
Singapore, 73 
Si:van, Emmanuel, 161 
slavery, xiii, u, p, SSJ, 94, 101, 173, 140-41, 
159. 170. 181, J16 Slotkin, Richard, 63; Regmm~tion Through 
Vi~e,288 · 
Smith, Anthony, Tbe Gn1p0/iti'r of 
lnfOTJIIIIIion, 191 
Smith, Bernard, Europe~~~~ Virion """ tbe 
So11th Pt~rifi,, 99 
Smith, Goldwin, 166 
Smith, John, m 
Smith, Neil, Unn;en Deve/optflmt. 115 
Smollett, Tobias George, 70 
sociology, 41, 44• 170 
Solon, 33 
Somalia, 126 
Somaliland, 198 
Somoz11, Anastasio, 300 
Sorabjee, Corneli11, 118 
South Africa, 73. 105, 134-198, 316 
South America, xviii, 61, SSJ, 119, uo, 187; 
represented by Conrad, 131, 313 
South Seas, represented by Conrad, 1p 
Soviet Union, J4, 55, 199, 141, 181, 186 
Soyinka, Wole, xx, 119, 134-139, 143, 275 
Spain, 1o, 55, 83, SSJ, 134-199, 111, 154; Civil 
War, 172; empire, xxii, 7; Republic, 133 
Spence, Jonathan, To CJJ.nge Cbi1111, 163 
Spenser, Edmund, 7, 51, m; Vie'ID oftbe 
Prrsent St11te of lrrlllnd, 121, 1j6 
Spenser, Herbert, 141 
Spitzer, Leo, 43, 45, 316 
Spumik, 4 7 
Sraford, Robert, 164-65 
Stanley, Henry, 1oo, 166 
Steel, Ronald, Wll!ter Lippm11nn and tbe 
Amni'"" Century, 184~5 
Stendhal, 47, 77, 78, 157; Le Rouge et lenoir, 
SJ8 
Stepan, Nancy, 100 
Sterne, Laurence, 70 
Stevens, Wallace, 333 
Stev'enson, Robert Louis, 63 
Stocking, George, 101, 108 
Stone, I. F., 318 
Stone, Oliver, JFK, 315; Sal'IJIIIJor, xix 
Stone, Robert, xviii, 314i A Flag for S1111rire, 
151 
Strachey, John, Tbe End of Empin, 198 
Stravinsky, Igor, 141; Sam ill printempr, 188 
Street, Brian, Tbe Sawg' in Litmnun, 100 
suucroralism, 311 
Suarez, Francisco, 140 Index 379 
Su/JtJitnn Shu/itl, 36, ZI7, ZJl, ZJ$1 266, 3U, 313 
Sudan, 36, 73, 274 
Suez, zoo; Canal, 38. IIJ, 120. 126, 127, 13) 
Sukarno, 224 
Suleri, Sara, T~ Rhet¥Jri~ of E"glirh [,{/;.,. 
xxiv 
Sumatra, 2JJ 
surrealism, z66 
Swift, Jonathan, :UJ, 238, 296 
Switzerland, 44 
Syria, 39, 198, 219, 247-4B, 2J2, 298, 300, 306 
Tagore, Rabindranath, 219, 232, 264> 31); 
Nfllion•lil1tl, 21 J 
Tahiti, 198 
Tahtawi, 2)2 
Taiwan, 330 
Tempels, Pladde, &ntw PhiloiDJlb3, 193 
Temple, Charles, 100 
Tennyson, Alfred Lord, 162; The llyllr of the 
Ki"& 105 
terrorism, 27, 3<>9'"'-Io, 327 
Thackeray, William Makepeace, xiv, 68, 71, 
7.f. !OJ, 133· JIB; v.,;ry F•ir. 6z, 74> 76, 83 
Thapar, Romila, 168 
Thateher, Margaret, 327, 328 
Third World, xix, 93, 268; anti-Western 
histories, 34; after colonialism, 21; 
colonialist practices, •-r-•8; decolonization 
of, xii; nationalism, 216; Western views 
of, xvii-xviii, 28 
Thompson, Edward M., 209, 24o; The Other 
Sitie of the Mel•4 147, 2o6-o7, 209 
Thornton, A. P., 166; The lmperitd lit~~ .,, 
ltr Enemies-, 241 
Tibawi, A. L., 2)2 
Tibi, Bassam, 2.52 
Tillion, Germaine, I8J 
Tocqueville, Alexis de, I8z-8J, 2or, on 
Algeria, 241 
Todorov, Tzvetan, 278; NoUJ' rt ks IJII""r, 97 
Tolsroi, Leo, 217 
Tompkins,]. M. S, 140 
Tone, Wolf, zn, 236 
Tonkin,198 
Toronto, 323 
Toussaint L'Ouverrure, 246-47, 248, 2JI, 
2)3, 2)6, 279, 28o 
travel writing, xv, xviii, 7J• 99, 187, 189, 265 
Trevelyan, Charles, 109 Trilling, Lionel, 6.5 
Trinidad, 247 
Troir Conter, 175 
Trollope, Anthony, 166 
Trujillo Molina, Rafael Leonidas, 256 
Tucker, Judith, 41, 26o 
Tucker, Robert W., 288 · 
Tunisia, 191, z66 
Turkey, 6, 189, 218, 287, 296, 335 
Turner, Brian, M~~n Qll(/ the £11(/ of 
Orimrlliirm, 41 
Turner, Victor, 14o-41 
Twain, Mark, 63, 287; The Almrtunr of 
Hu~klekrry Fin11, 138 
Uganda, 73, 2 7 5 
Union des Travailleurs Negres, 242 
United Irishmen, 236 . 
United Nations, 36, 199, 242, 283, 287, 293. 
300 
United Stares, xi, xxvi, 35, 39, ~. 47, 50. )4> 
J7, IJ2, 214, 253, 26o, 267, 276, 281, 315, 323, 
329; anti-imperialist policy, 5, 24I-42; 
controversy about culrural literacy, 328; 
and culrural identity, xxv; decline in 
economic power, 28~ foreign policy, 
z8z4o3, 322; and Gulf War, 4-5, zo, 
36-37, 55, 131, 286; history of, xxvi, 19Ji 
imperial coherence, xxii, xxiii; as 
imperial power, xvii-xix, 6, 7, 8-9, 10, 
64> 171, 199, 282-95, 298; military 
interventions, 55, 28_r-&S, 326; as last 
superpower, xxiii, .54> 282; and official 
narrative, 32~ territorial expansion, 
63, 288-8!); and transnational inter­
dependence, 319; and world-English 
group, 306 
universities, xxvi, 239, 303; Arab English 
departments, 304-<>.fi modem secular, 321 
Updike, John, m 
Van Alstyne, Richard, The Riri"g Americ., 
Empin, 8, 195 
Vatican, the, 240 
Vatimo, Gianni, 329 
Vendler, Helen, 73 
Venice, 52 
Verba, 290 
Verdi, Giuseppi, 146; Ailt~, 111-32; Attikl, 113; u, &llo in MM~ber•. nz; J)q, C•mr, m, Index 
Verdi (&ontinued) 
n6; Falsllff, 113; La Foruz del Destino, 111; 
l Lom6ardi, 111, 113; Nahu&&O, 111, 113-14; 
Ote/16, n~ Rigoletto, 111, n s; Simon 
/Jo&&anegra, 111; La Tmviata, 11:1; 
!I Trov~~tore, 111 
Verne, Jules, 187 
Vico, Giovanni Battista, 44 
Victoria, Queen, 140, 311; as Empress of 
India, 16 
Vietnam, xix, xxiii, 8, 11, 17, H• 13o, 1¢, 199, 
114, 141, 1)9. 164, 184, 18), 186, 189, 190, 
191, 31), 314 
Virgil, 189 
Virilio, Paul, 316, 331, 331 
Viswanathan, Gauri, 41, 109 
Vitoria, Francisco de, 140 
Volney, 83, 97, 121 
Voltaire, 240 
Vossler, Karl, 4J 
voyage· in, 216, 23~1 
Wagner, Richard, 113, IIJ, 117; 
Gotterdiimmerung, 11:1; Trisllm, 111 
Wagner, Wieland, 111, 114 
Walcott, Derek, 31, 313 
Walker, Frank, 113 
Wallerstein, Immanuel, 311, 334-3.r 
Wall Street Journal, The, 37, 191 
Walpole, Horace, 76 
Warrant of Precedence, 1 H 
Washington, D.C., xviii, 310 
Washington, George, 19) 
Waterloo, 7) 
Watt, Ian, 19, 7o 
Weaver, William, 113 
Webb, Beatrice and Sidney, 99, 103 
Weber, Max, 1)4 
Wechsberg,Joseph, 113 
Weinberg, Alben K., Manifest Destiny, 188 
West Africa, •o.r, 199, 119, 164 
West Indies, .r•, )9, 89, 90, 94, 101, 199 
White, Hayden, Metahistory, 304 
White, Patrick, xvi 
Wilberforce, William, 84, 1)6 
Wilkins, Charles, 1)3 
Williams, Eric, 94. 1$$, 1.r7, 1)9, 31~ 
CIIJiilfllism 1111d Slllwry, 9J 
Williams, Raymond,.xxvii, 14, 41, )1, 17113. 
1)9, 278, 318; The Country 1111d the City, 6.r, 82~4, 87, 92, 9~ Culture and So&iety, 6), 
143-44 
Williams, William Appleman, .r, H• 64--6), 
72, 287 
Wilson, Angus, The Strt~~~ge Ride uf Rudyard 
Kipling, I)O 
Wilson, Edmund, 14J 
Wolf, Eric, 64 
Wollstonecraft, Mary, 118 
women's movement, 218, 266, z67, 3oo, 
311 
Woodberry, Edward, 46-47, 48 
Woolf, Virginia, 47; A Room ufOne's Own. 
334; To the Lighthouse, •89 
Wordsworth, William, 6o, 81, 3o.r 
World Order Models Project, 283 
World War I, 71, 194, 197, 119, 121, 263 
World Warn, 7. 2), 197· 198, 219, 124, 241, 
142, zB.r, 288, 316, 335 
Yacine, Kateb, •8.r, 2)9 
Yariko, 211 
Yeats, William Butler, 16, .r6, 188, 164; 
"Among School Children," 237; "The 
Circus Animals' Desertion," 237; and 
decolonization, 11o-21, 12~8; "Easter 
1916," "Ego Dominus Tuus," 227; 
and fascism, 227-18, 230, 133; "The 
Fisherman," 133""34; "Leda and the 
Swan," 235; and mysticism, 12.,-28, 23o; 
"Nineteen Hundred and Nineteen," 231; 
"A Prayer for My Daughter," 237; and 
Protestant Ascendancy, 117; resisting 
imperialism, 231; The Rose, 226; "The 
Second Coming," 135; "September 1913," 
132; "The Statues," 227; "The Tower," 
134, 137; The TtnDeT, 23.r; "Under Ben 
Bulben," 237; A Vision, 117 
Y eltsin, Boris, 328 
Young, Marilyn, 190 
Yugoslavia, xx, 284 
Zaghloul, Saad, 196 
Zaire, 230, 27 .r 
Zaydan, Girgi, 21) 
Zia, 27 
Zinn, Howard, J, 287 
Zionism, J, 26o 
Zola, Emile, 47, IJ6, 16o, 187 