StalinismBlackwell Essential Readings in History
This series comprises concise collections of key articles on important
historical topics. Designed as a complement to standard survey histories, thevolumes are intended to help introduce students to the range of scholarlydebate in a subject area. Each collection includes a general introduction andbrief contextual headnotes to each article, offering a coherent, criticalframework for study .
Published
The German Reformation: The Essential Readings
C. Scott Dixon
The English Civil War: The Essential Readings
Peter Gaunt
The Italian Renaissance: The Essential Readings
Paula Findlen
The Scientiﬁc Revolution: The Essential Readings
Marcus Hellyer
Stalinism: The Essential Readings
David L. Hoffmann
The Cold War: The Essential Readings
Klaus Larres and Ann Lane
The Third Reich: The Essential Readings
Christian Leitz
The Counter-Reformation: The Essential Readings
David M. Luebke
The Crusades: The Essential Readings
Thomas F . Madden
The Russian Revolution: The Essential Readings
Martin Miller
The French Revolution: The Essential Readings
Ronald Schechter
Cromwell and the Interregnum: The Essential Readings
David L. Smith
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Stalinism
The Essential Readings
Edited by David L. Hoffmann
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Editorial material and organization © 2003 David L. Hoffmann
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5018, USA
108 Cowley Road, Oxford 0X4 1JF , UK550 Swanston Street, Carlton South, Melbourne, Victoria 3053, AustraliaKurfürstendamm 57, 10707 Berlin, Germany
The right of David L. Hoffmann to be identiﬁed as the Author of the Editorial
Material in this Work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright,Designs, and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by theUK Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission ofthe publisher.
First published 2003 by Blackwell Publishers Ltd, a Blackwell Publishing
company
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Stalinism : the essential readings / edited by David L. Hoffmann.
p. cm. – (Blackwell essential readings in history)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0–631–22890–X — ISBN 0–631–22891–8 (pbk.)1. Soviet Union—Politics and government – 1936–1953. 2. Soviet
Union—Social conditions. I. Hoffmann, David L. (David Lloyd), 1961–II. Series.
DK 267 .S6946 2003947.084—dc21
2002009489
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library .
Set in 10
1/2on 12 pt Photina
by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong KongPrinted and bound in the United Kingdomby MPG Books, Bodmin, Cornwall
For further information on
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:http://www .blackwellpublishing.com
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
To my daughter Sarah
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Contents
Acknowledgments ix
Glossary xi
Introduction: Interpretations of Stalinism 1
David L. Hoffmann
Part I The Origins of Stalinism 9
1Stalin’s Role 11
Stalin and his Stalinism: Power and Authority in the Soviet 
Union, 1930–1953 13
Ronald Grigor Suny
2Social Origins 37
Grappling with Stalinism 39
Moshe Lewin
3Socialist Ideology 63
The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia 65
Martin Malia
4The Foreign Threat 81
The Objectives of the Great T error, 1937–1938 83
Oleg Khlevnyuk
5The Welfare State 105
Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization 107
Stephen Kotkin
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6State Violence 127
State Violence as T echnique: The Logic of Violence in Soviet 
T otalitarianism 129
Peter Holquist
Part II The Consequences of Stalinism 157
7Resistance and Conformity 159
Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times 161
Sheila Fitzpatrick
8Stalinist Subjectivity 179
Working, Struggling, Becoming: Stalin-Era Autobiographical 
T exts 181
Jochen Hellbeck
9Women and Gender 211
Women in Soviet Society: Equality, Development, and 
Social Change 213
Gail Warshofsky Lapidus
10Ethnicity and Nationality 237
Nature and Nurture in a Socialist Utopia: Delineating the 
Soviet Socio-Ethnic Body in the Age of Socialism 239
Amir W einer
11The Postwar Years 275
Russia after the War: Hopes, Illusions, and Disappointments 277
Elena Zubkova
Index 302viii CONTENTS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Acknowledgments
The editor and publishers wish to thank the following for permission to
use copyright material:
Ronald Grigor Suny , “Stalin and his Stalinism: power and authority in
the Soviet Union, 1930–53,” from Stalinism and Nazism: Dictatorships in
Comparison , edited by I. Kershaw and M. Lewin pp. 26–52. Copyright ©
1997 Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission of thepublisher and author.
Moshe Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System: Essays in the Social History
of Interwar Russia , pp. 286–338. Copyright © 1985 The Harvester Press
Ltd. 
Martin Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia,
1917–1991 , pp. 178–81, 217–26. Copyright © 1994 Martin Malia.
Reprinted with permission of The Free Press, a Division of Simon &Schuster, Inc.
Oleg Khlevnyuk, “The Objectives of the Great Terror, 1937–1938,”
from Soviet History, 1917–53 , edited by Julian Cooper, Maureen Perrie,
and E. A. Rees. Published by St. Martin’s Press. Copyright © 1995Macmillan Press Ltd. Reprinted with permission of Macmillan Ltd.
Stephen Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization , pp. 6–9,
16–23, and 381–93. Copyright © 1997 The Regents of the Universityof California. Reprinted with permission of The Regents of the Univer-sity of California and the University of California Press.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Peter Holquist, “State Violence as Technique: The Logic of Violence in
Soviet Totalitarianism,” from Landscaping the Human Garden , edited by
Amir Weiner. Copyright © 2003 by the Board of Trustees of the LelandStanford Jr. University . Reprinted with the permission of Stanford University Press, www .sup.org.
Sheila Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary
Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930s , pp. 218–27. Copyright © 1999 Oxford
University Press, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Oxford UniversityPress, Inc.
Jochen Hellbeck, “Working, Struggling, Becoming: Stalin-Era Autobio-
graphical Texts,” The Russian Review , vol. 60(3), July 2001, pp. 340–59.
Copyright © 2001 The Russian Review . Reprinted by permission of the
author and publisher.
Gail Lapidus, W omen in Soviet Society: Equality, Development, and Social
Change , pp. 95–119. Copyright © 1978 The Regents of the University
of California. Reprinted with permission of The Regents of the Univer-sity of California and the University of California Press.
Amir Weiner, “Nature, Nurture and Memory in a Socialist Utopia:
Delineating the Soviet Socio-Ethnic Body in the Age of Socialism,” American Historical Review , October 1999, pp. 1114–55. Copyright ©
1999 American Historical Association. Reprinted by permission of theauthor and publisher.
Elena Zubkova, Russia After the War: Hopes, Illusions, and Disappoint-
ments, 1945–1957 , pp. 20–39. Translated by Hugh Ragsdale. Copyright
© 1998 M. E. Sharpe.
Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders and to obtain their
permission for the use of copyright material. The authors and publish-ers will gladly receive any information enabling them to rectify any erroror omission in subsequent editions.xACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Glossary
apparatchiki – see apparaty .
apparaty – Soviet bureaucrats or functionaries.
Bolsheviks – Communists.Bukharin, Nikolai – Communist Party leader and rival of Stalin; 
executed during Great Purges.
byt – everyday life.
Central Committee – governing body of the Communist Party; elected
by Party congresses.
Cheka – Soviet secret police; subsequently renamed OGPU and NKVD.CPSU – Communist Party of the Soviet Union.Decembrists – Russian ofﬁcers who revolted against the tsarist auto-
cracy in 1825.
de-Cossackization – elimination of Cossacks (frontier people).dekulakization – elimination of kulaks (wealthy peasants) through 
dispossession and deportation.
Enlightenment – eighteenth-century philosophical movement that
stressed the application of reason to human affairs.
Ezhov , Nikolai – head of Soviet secret police (NKVD) during the Great
Terror.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
First Five-Year Plan – plan of rapid industrialization, 1928–32.
Great Break – Stalin’s radical policy change in the late 1920s; initiated
collectivization, rapid industrialization, and attack on non-Communistauthorities.
Great Patriotic War – term for Second World War in the Soviet Union.Great Purges – arrests and executions of Communist Party members;
part of the Great Terror, 1936–8.
Great Terror – widespread arrests and executions, 1936–8; included 
the Great Purges of Communist Party members.
Great War – First World War.Gulag – system of forced labor camps.Homo Sovieticus – Soviet Man.Ivan groznyi – see Ivan the Terrible.
Ivan the Terrible – sixteenth-century Russian tsar.Kamenev , Lev – a Communist Party leader; executed during the Great
Purges.
kolkhoz – collective farm.kolkhozniki – collective farm peasants.Komsomol – Communist youth organization.Khrushchev , Nikita – succeeded Stalin as leader of the Communist Party
and Soviet Union.
Kirov , Sergei – popular leader of Leningrad Party organization; seen by
some as potential rival to Stalin; murdered in 1934.
krai – region; territorial administrative unit.kraikom – regional Communist Party committee.kulaks – wealthy peasants; deemed exploiters and class enemies by the
Soviet government.
Lenin, Vladimir – founder and leader of Bolshevik/Communist Party
until his death in 1924.
MTS – machine tractor stations.nachal’stvo – authorities; command.
Narkomnats – Commissariat of Nationalities.xii GLOSSARY
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Narkomyust – Commissariat of Justice.
NKVD – Soviet secret police; previously called OGPU.New Economic Policy (NEP) – policy enacted by Lenin in 1921; allowed
for limited private enterprise and free trade.
Nepmen – private entrepreneurs of NEP period.obkom – provincial Communist Party committee.oblast – province; territorial administrative unit.OGPU – Soviet secret police; subsequently called NKVD.OUN – Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists.Peter the Great – eighteenth-century Russian tsar.philosophes – French philosophers of the eighteenth-century 
Enlightenment.
Politburo – Communist Party’s highest decision-making body; elected
by Central Committee.
proletariat – industrial working class.raikom – district Communist Party committee.raion – district; territorial administrative unit.Shklovsky , Viktor – literary theorist and leader of the Russian Formalist
movement in the early 1920s.
smychka – alliance; term use by Communists to refer to their idea of an
alliance between workers and peasants in the 1920s.
sovkhozy – state collective farms.spravka – list; inventory .
Stakhanovites – hero workers; named for record-breaking coal miner,
Aleksei Stakhanov .
stakhanovtsy – see Stakhanovites.
troiki – tribunals during the Great Terror.Trotsky , Lev – a Communist Party leader and rival of Stalin; expelled
from the Party in 1927 and subsequently deported from the country .
Tsar – title of pre-revolutionary hereditary monarchs.
UP A – Ukrainian Insurgent Army .GLOSSARY xiii
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
velikii perelom – see Great Break.
Vlasov army – anti-Soviet Russian army during the Second World War.vozhd’ – leader.
zemstvos – organs of local self-government in the late pre-revolutionary
period.
Zinoviev , Grigorii – a Communist Party leader; executed during the
Great Purges.xiv GLOSSARY
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Introduction: Interpretations 
of Stalinism
David L. Hoffmann
For scholars of Soviet history , no problem looms larger than that of
Stalinism. How was it that the October Revolution of 1917, whichseemed to promise human liberation and equality , resulted not in a communist utopia but instead in a Stalinist dictatorship? Why did thisattempt to create a perfect society lead to gulag prison camps, bloodypurges, and unprecedented levels of state repression? For decades historians have grappled with these questions, and have put forward a range of competing explanations. Some have blamed Stalin per-sonally , others have focused on socialist ideology or the international threat, still others have explored Stalinism’s social and cultural origins.Stalinism, then, represents not only the most central problem in Soviethistory , but one rich in historiographical controversy and interpretationas well.
This book presents various explanations of Stalinism written both 
by eminent historians and by younger scholars who have conductedresearch in newly opened Russian archives. The articles and excerptsoffer a range of interpretations as to what caused Stalinism and whatwere its social consequences. Taken together these interpretationsprovide an important lesson in historical causality . Underlying eachexplanation of Stalinism are assumptions regarding the forces thatcause events to happen. Interpretations that stress Stalin’s personal role assume that history is shaped by individuals. Explanations thatemphasize socialist ideology see ideas and ideological systems as drivinghistory . Social historians of Stalinism focus on characteristics of Sovietsociety , while cultural historians highlight Soviet cultural constructs ormodern political culture more generally .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Stalinism can be deﬁned as a set of tenets, policies, and practices 
instituted by the Soviet government during the years in which Stalin was in power, 1928–53. It was characterized by extreme coercionemployed for the purpose of economic and social transformation.Among the particular features of Stalinism were the abolition of privateproperty and free trade; the collectivization of agriculture; a planned,state-run economy and rapid industrialization; the wholesale liquida-tion of so-called exploiting classes, involving massive deportations and incarcerations; large-scale political terror against alleged enemies,including those within the Communist Party itself; a cult of personalitydeifying Stalin; and Stalin’s virtually unlimited dictatorship over thecountry .
The range of phenomena included under the name Stalinism alerts us
to the fact that not all aspects of Stalinism can be explained by a singlecause. Indeed, historians generally eschew monocausal explanations,and instead see a variety of forces as shaping history . Even a single Stal-inist policy , such as collectivization, may be best explained by an array offactors – Soviet leaders’ ideological aversion to private agriculture,national security imperatives to industrialize quickly , a short-term economic crisis that prompted government grain requisitioning, and apenchant among modern policymakers for economic planning and state control. But because the study of history represents an attempt to understand the world and what makes things happen, historians areobliged to weigh these causal factors and argue which of them predom-inated or how they worked in combination to produce a certain outcome. 
During the Cold War, debates as to what caused Stalinism were highly
politicized. At issue were the legitimacy of the Soviet government andthe culpability of socialist ideology .
1The totalitarian model, the domi-
nant paradigm of the Cold War era, posited an all-powerful governmentruling over an atomized, defenseless society . This model explained how a government that lacked popular support and legitimacy couldnonetheless remain in power. Many totalitarian theorists emphasizedthe role of socialist ideology , thereby implicitly or explicitly condemningit for Stalinist brutality and terror. Such interpretations saw Stalinismas the logical result of the October Revolution, when, according to thisview, the Bolsheviks (later renamed Communists) seized power in an 2DAVID L .HOFFMANN
1Socialist ideology encompasses a range of political thought, of which Marxism 
became the leading strain. The political party of Russian Marxists led by Vladimir Lenin(and subsequently by Stalin) was called the Bolsheviks, renamed Communists after the October Revolution. Communist leaders never claimed to have achieved commun-ism; according to Marxism a communist utopia would emerge only as the last stage ofhistory . But Stalin did claim to have established socialism in the Soviet Union by the mid-1930s.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
illegitimate coup d’état and proceeded to impose their ideological vision
upon the population.2
In the 1970s and 1980s, revisionist scholars challenged the totali-
tarian model, and presented Soviet society as more than a passive objectcontrolled by an all-powerful state. One revisionist trend emphasized therole of workers and soldiers in the October Revolution and their supportfor the Bolsheviks. This research portrayed the Bolshevik rise to poweras a popular revolution rather than a coup d’état, and thus attributedto the Soviet government a substantial degree of legitimacy .
3Another
strain of revisionist scholarship stressed that Stalinism was not thelogical outcome of the Revolution, and that more moderate alternativesexisted within the Communist Party . These scholars drew a distinctionbetween Bolshevism and Stalinism, and implicitly exonerated socialistideology from the crimes of Stalinism.
4
Of course revisionism required that Stalinism be explained in some
other way . If the October Revolution was not an illegitimate seizure ofpower that created a ruthless dictatorship, and if socialist ideology didnot necessarily lead to Stalinist excesses, then revisionists still had toexplain the origins of the Stalinist dictatorship and terror. While revi-sionist scholars generally held Stalin accountable for betraying theideals of the Revolution, many also looked for deeper causes of Stalin-ism. Some focused on Stalin’s control of Communist Party personnel, oron support within the Soviet bureaucracy for him and his policies.
5INTRODUCTION :INTERPRETATIONS OF STALINISM 3
2Merle Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled (Cambridge, Mass., 1953); Carl J. Friedrich and 
Zbigniew K. Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy (Cambridge, Mass., 1956);
A. Avtorkhanov , Stalin and the Soviet Communist Party: A Study in the Technology of
Power (London, 1959); Alexander Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago 1918–1956 , trans.
Thomas. P . Whitney and Harry Willetts, vols. 1–3 (New York, 1973–8); Adam Ulam, The
Bolsheviks: The Intellectual and Political History of the Triumph of Communism in Russia(New York, 1973).
3Marc Ferro, October 1917: A Social History of the Russian Revolution (London, 1980);
Ronald G. Suny , “Towards a Social History of the October Revolution,” American Histor-
ical Review , vol. 88, no. 1 (1983); S. A. Smith, Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories,
1917–1918 (New York, 1983); Alexander Rabinowitch, The Bolsheviks Come to Power:
The Revolution of 1917 in Petrograd (New York, 1978); Allan K. Wildman, The End of the
Russian Imperial Army: The Road to Soviet Power and Peace (Princeton, 1987); Diane
Koenker and William G. Rosenberg, Strikes and Revolution in Russia, 1917 (Princeton,
1989).
4Stephen F . Cohen, “Bolshevism and Stalinism,” and Robert C. Tucker, “Stalinism as
Revolution from Above,” in Tucker, ed., Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation (New
York, 1977); Roy Medvedev , Let History Judge: The Origins and Consequences of Stalinism
(New York, 1971); Moshe Lewin, Lenin’s Last Struggle (London, 1969); Giuseppe Boffa,
The Stalin Phenomenon (Ithaca, 1992). In this volume, see the selection by Suny .
5T . H. Rigby , “Stalinism and the Mono-Organizational Society ,” and Moshe Lewin, “The
Social Background of Stalinism,” in Tucker, ed.; Graeme Gill, The Origins of the Stalinist
Political System (New York, 1990). Even prior to revisionist scholarship, Stalin’s 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Others sought the social origins of Stalinism, portraying Soviet society ,
with its backward peasant population, as a fertile breeding ground forthe patriarchal authoritarianism of Stalinism.
6Even more radical revi-
sionists suggested that certain segments within Soviet society supportedor even advocated Stalinist policies such as rapid industrialization, collectivization, and purging.
7
While revisionism provided a far more sophisticated picture of Stal-
inism than did the totalitarian model, not all aspects of revisionist schol-arship were accepted by the scholarly community . Sheila Fitzpatrick, theleading scholar in the ﬁeld and one who ﬁrst raised the possibility thatStalinist policies emanated from Soviet society , herself rejected the ideathat collectivization and industrialization should be described as a “rev-olution from below” and instead argued these policies were clearly the initiative of the Stalinist leadership.
8On the alleged link between
peasant patriarchalism and Stalinism, further research revealed that theSoviet Union’s largely peasant society , far from supporting Stalin’s rule,opposed Stalinist policies and engaged in active or passive resistance.
9
Some scholars such as Martin Malia rejected revisionist social historyaltogether and insisted that Stalinism was indeed the logical result of anattempt to put socialist ideology into practice.
10A more general turn in
the historical profession away from social history toward culturalhistory has also contributed to post-revisionist scholarship which nolonger seeks the origins of Stalinism in Soviet society .
114DAVID L .HOFFMANN
accumulation of power within the bureaucracy had been well documented; see E. H.
Carr, Socialism in One Country 1924–1926 , vol. 1 (London, 1958); Robert V . Daniels, The
Conscience of the Revolution: Communist Opposition in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Mass.,
1960). Trotsky was the ﬁrst to blame Stalinism on the “triumph of the bureaucracy;” seeLeon Trotsky , The Revolution Betrayed: What is the Soviet Union and Where is it Going? (New
York, 1937).
6See Lewin’s article in this volume.
7William J. Chase, W orkers, Society, and the Soviet State: Labor and Life in Moscow,
1918–1929 (Urbana, Ill., 1987); Lynne Viola, The Best Sons of the Fatherland: W orkers in
the Vanguard of Collectivization (New York, 1987); Robert Thurston, “The Stakhanovite
Movement: Background to the Great Terror in the Factories, 1935–1938,” and RobertaT . Manning, “The Great Purges in a Rural District: Belyi Raion Revisited,” in J. Arch Gettyand Manning, eds., Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives (New York, 1993).
8Sheila Fitzpatrick, “New Perspectives on Stalinism,” The Russian Review , vol. 45, no. 4
(1987).
9Lynne Viola, “ Bab’i Bunty and Peasant Women’s Protest during Collectivization,” The
Russian Review , vol. 45, no. 1 (1986); Sheila Fitzpatrick , Stalin’s Peasants: Resistance and
Survival in the Russian Village after Collectivization (New York, 1994); David L. Hoffmann,
Peasant Metropolis: Social Identities in Moscow, 1929–1941 (Ithaca, 1994).
10See Malia in this volume.
11Recent cultural history that provides new perspectives on Stalinism includes Katerina
Clark, Petersburg: Crucible of Cultural Revolution (Cambridge, Mass., 1995); Boris Groys,
The Total Art of Stalinism: Avant-Garde, Aesthetic Dictatorship, and Beyond (Princeton,
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
One important trend within post-revisionism attempts to place 
Stalinism in an international comparative context. During the Cold Warscholars tended to assume a fundamental disjuncture between theSoviet Union and Western democracies, and they therefore highlightedthe distinctive features of Soviet history .
12But now that these Cold War
dichotomies are less salient, it is possible to see striking parallels, as wellas important differences, between Stalinist social practices and those ofother modern states. Recent work on Stalinism has demonstrated thatit, like other twentieth-century governmental systems, deployed tech-nologies of social cataloguing and intervention that were new to themodern era. These technologies grew out of Enlightenment thoughtand European disciplinary culture, which promoted social interventionin the name of rational social reform. State intervention in society vastlyincreased during the First World War, when the advent of mass warfareprompted political leaders across Europe to expand both welfare programs and excisionary coercion to ensure a loyal and militarily ﬁt population. The Soviet state, formed at this moment of wartime mobi-lization, institutionalized many of these interventionist practices andused them to pursue its own ideological agenda. New scholarship thusmaintains that Stalinism, with its radical interventionism to reshapesociety , cannot be understood apart from the rise of modern statewelfare and state violence.
13
Equally exciting new work is being done on the consequences of
Stalinism – how Stalinist policies affected the population and howpeople responded to these policies. Here the opening of former SovietINTRODUCTION :INTERPRETATIONS OF STALINISM 5
1992); Michael David-Fox, “What is Cultural Revolution?” The Russian Review , vol. 58,
no. 2 (1999); Karen Petrone, Life Has Become More Joyous, Comrades: Celebrations in the
Time of Stalin (Bloomington, 2000); James von Geldern and Richard Stites, eds., Mass
Culture in Soviet Russia: Tales, Poems, Songs, Movies, Plays, and Folklore, 1917–1953(Bloomington, 1995); Catriona Kelly and David Shepherd, Russian Cultural Studies: An
Introduction (Oxford, 1998); Stefan Plaggenborg, Revolutionskultur: Menschenbilder und
Kulturelle Praxis in Sowjetrussland Zwischen Oktoberrevolution und Stalinimus (Koln, 1996).
For further discussion of the shift to cultural history , see Sheila Fitzpatrick, ed., Stalinism:
New Directions (London, 2000), pp. 7–11.
12The totalitarian model did posit a fundamental similarity between Nazi Germany and
Stalinist Russia, but it counter-posed these systems to Western liberal democracies. Mod-ernization theory represents the one attempt during the Cold War to see similar processesof industrialization and urbanization as shaping both Western democracies and theSoviet Union (as well as other non-Western countries); see, for example, Cyril E. Black,ed., The Transformation of Russian Society: Aspects of Social Change since 1861 (Cambridge,
Mass., 1960). This theory , however, was criticized for its ethnocentrism and determin-ism; it implied that all countries would ultimately become like modern Western societies.
13I discuss these ideas further in “European Modernity and Soviet Socialism,” in David
L. Hoffmann and Yanni Kotsonis, eds., Russian Modernity: Politics, Knowledge, Practices
(New York, 2000). In this volume, see Kotkin, Holquist, and Weiner.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
archives has proven especially important for research. Using previously
classiﬁed documents, scholars have discovered widespread opposition toStalinism, including worker strikes, peasant protests, and popularexpressions of contempt for Stalin and the ruling elite, not to mentionmore passive forms of resistance to the Stalinist system.
14Additional
new sources such as diaries have provided valuable insights into howpeople experienced and understood Stalinism, and how some individu-als came to internalize Stalinist ideas and values.
15
Other important work, both past and present, explores the impact 
of Stalinism on particular groups within Soviet society . The Stalinistgender order, as constructed during the 1930s, meant the large-scalerecruitment of women into the industrial workforce, but Soviet propa-ganda simultaneously emphasized women’s reproductive obligations.Gail Warshofsky Lapidus’s classic book on this topic, excerpted in this volume, still offers the most succinct discussion of women’s doubleburden under Stalinism, but it has been joined by important newresearch as well.
16Studies of Stalinist nationality policy represent some
of the most vibrant new scholarship in the ﬁeld. These studies explorethe treatment of national minorities, and reveal the ways the Soviet gov-ernment inadvertently fostered the very national conscious it hoped to supercede.
17Amir Weiner’s article in this volume is pathbreaking 
not only in situating Soviet conceptions of ethnicity within the largerutopian project, but in its analysis of the Second World War’s impact onthe Soviet puriﬁcation drive. The excerpt from Elena Zubkova’s book alsoexempliﬁes pioneering research on the postwar Stalin years, a periodscholars are only beginning to investigate.
Stalinism is such a large topic that a great deal of important schol-
arship could not be included in this volume. Among the most signiﬁcantof this work is Robert Davies’s multi-volume history of Stalinist indus-6DAVID L .HOFFMANN
14Jeffrey J. Rossman, “The Teikovo Cotton Workers’ Strike of April 1932: Class, Gender
and Identity Politics in Stalin’s Russia,” The Russian Review , vol. 56, no. 1 (1997); Lynne
Viola, Peasant Rebels Under Stalin: Collectivization and the Culture of Peasant Resistance (New
York, 1996); Sarah Davies, Popular Opinion in Stalin’s Russia: Terror , Propaganda, and
Dissent, 1934–1941 (New York, 1997); Golfo Alexopoulos, “Portrait of a Con Artist as
a Soviet Man,” Slavic Review , vol. 57, no. 4 (1998). In this volume, see Fitzpatrick.
15Nataliia Kozlova, “Krest’ianskii syn,” Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniia 1994, no. 6;
Veronique Garros et al., eds., Intimacy and Terror: Soviet Diaries of the 1930s (New York,
1995). In this volume, see Hellbeck.
16See, for example, Wendy Goldman, W omen, the State and Revolution: Soviet Family Policy
and Social Life, 1917–1936 (New York, 1993); Melanie Ilic, W omen W orkers in the Soviet
Interwar Economy: From ‘Protection’ to ‘Equality’ (New York, 1999).
17See, for example, Yuri Slezkine, “The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a
Socialist State Promoted Ethnic Particularism,” Slavic Review , vol. 53, no. 2 (1994);
Ronald Grigor Suny , The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism Revolution, and the Collapse of the
Soviet Union (Stanford, 1993); Terry Martin, The Afﬁrmative Action Empire: Nations and
Nationalism in the Soviet Union, 1923–1939 (Ithaca, 2001).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
trialization. Covering all aspects of Soviet economic history during the
industrialization drive, Davies’s work, along with contributions by otherBritish economic historians, constitutes one of the most valuable bodiesof scholarship on Stalinism.
18This research is nicely complemented by
several important studies of Soviet workers during Soviet industrializa-tion, and by recent work on Soviet trade and consumption during theStalin era.
19Regrettably scholarship on Stalinist diplomatic and military
history also could not be included in this volume.20Instead the focus will
be on the political and social history of Stalinism.
Stalinism was one of the most central phenomena of Russian history
and of the twentieth-century world; it was also one of the deadliest,involving the incarceration and execution of millions of people. It istherefore appropriate that Stalinism has been the subject of intensescrutiny and lively scholarly debate. Historians have the role of tryingto understand the past – what happened, why things occurred, andwhat they mean. In the case of the Stalinist past, historians struggle tounderstand it, not only , as is so often intoned, to avoid repeating it, butalso to come to terms with it, and perhaps even to help work throughthe collective trauma it inﬂicted. Stalinism represents one of the darkestand most complex pages of human history , and it therefore deserves ourmost careful attention and thought. This volume seeks to facilitate thattask by presenting a range of interpretations as to the origins and consequences of Stalinism.INTRODUCTION :INTERPRETATIONS OF STALINISM 7
18R. W . Davies, The Industrialization of Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Mass., 1980 and
London, 1989–1996). See also Alec Nove, An Economic History of the USSR (New York,
1969); E. A. Rees, Stalinism and Soviet Rail Transport, 1928–1941 (London, 1995);
Stephen Wheatcroft et al., “Soviet Industrialization Reconsidered: Some PreliminaryConclusions about Economic Development 1926–1941,” Economic History Review ,
1986, no. 2.
19On labor history , see Lewis H. Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity
(New York, 1988); Hiroaki Kuromiya, Stalin’s Industrial Revolution: Politics and W orkers,
1928–1932 (New York, 1988), and Freedom and Terror in the Donbas: A Ukrainian-Russian
Border Region, 1870s–1990s (New York, 1998); Francesco Benvenuti, Fuoco sui Sabota-
tori! Stachanovismo e Organizzazione Industriale in URSS, 1934–1938 (Rome, 1988);
Donald A. Filtzer, Soviet W orkers and Stalinist Industrialization: The Formation of Modern
Soviet Production Relations, 1928–1941 (London, 1986). On Stalinist trade, see E. A.
Osokina, Our Daily Bread: Socialist Distribution and the Art of Survival in Stalin’s Russia,
1927–1941 (Armonk, NY , 2001); Julie Hessler, “Cultured Trade: The Stalinist Turn
Towards Consumerism,” in Fitzpatrick, ed.; Amy E. Randall, “Revolutionary BolshevikWork: Stakhanovism in Retail Trade,” The Russian Review , vol. 59, no. 3 (2000).
20See, for example, Jonathan Haslam, The Soviet Union and the Struggle for Collective Secu-
rity in Europe, 1933–1939 (London, 1984); Gabriel Gorodetsky; Grand Delusion: Stalin
and the German Invasion of Russia (New Haven, 1999); William Taubman, Stalin’s Amer-
ican Policy: From Entente to Détente to Cold War (New York, 1982); John Erickson, The Road
to Stalingrad (London, 1975), and The Road to Berlin: Continuing the History of Stalin’s War
with Germany (Boulder, Co., 1983).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Part I The Origins of
Stalinism
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Stalin’s Role
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1
Stalin and his Stalinism: Power and
Authority in the Soviet Union,1930–1953
Ronald Grigor Suny
Excerpted from Ronald Grigor Suny, “Stalin and his Stalinism:
Power and Authority in the Soviet Union, 1930–53,” in IanKershaw and Moshe Lewin, eds., Stalinism and Nazism:
Dictatorships in Comparison (New Y ork: Cambridge University
Press, 1997).
Editor’s Introduction
In explaining Stalinism, many historians focus on Joseph Stalin himself –
his mindset, his methods, and his personality. Characterizations of Stalinhighlight both his Machiavellian thinking and his malicious nature. Stalin isthus portrayed as an evil genius – someone whose cunning and ability towield power were matched only by his vindictiveness toward potentialrivals. In this view, the brutality and terror of the Stalinist system derivedprincipally from Stalin himself.As an omnipotent but paranoid leader, Stalinarrested and executed millions of innocent people, including many of hisfellow Communist Party members. Through this exercise of mass terror,he ensured that no one opposed his policies or challenged his personaldictatorship.
Such explanations generally emphasize Stalin’s ruthless maneuvering to
account not only for his bloody reign but for his rise to power in the ﬁrstplace. Apart from his guile, Stalin seemed an unlikely successor to Lenin.He lacked the theoretical brilliance and oratorical skills of Trotsky andother leading Communists. Many Party members saw him primarily as afunctionary – someone skilled in organizational matters though unsuitedfor leadership. But Stalin proved to be an extremely effective politicalinﬁghter. By aligning ﬁrst with one group and then another, he succeededin discrediting and eliminating rivals, until he emerged in the late 1920s
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
as the supreme leader of the country.1Stalin was aided in his rise to power
by his appointment as the Communist Party’s General Secretary – theperson in charge of personnel matters. Initially seen as an administrativepost, Stalin used this position to promote his own loyalists within theParty and thus to build his base of support.
2
Other historians have questioned whether Stalin’s rise can be attrib-
uted solely to his manipulation and ruthlessness.They point out that Stalin,with his blunt and dogmatic style, actually appealed to many rank-and-ﬁleCommunists, and that his shifting positions were responses to changingpolitical and economic circumstances instead of purely tactical moves tooutﬂank his opponents.
3Scholars have also noted that both Stalin’s polit-
ical shifts and his intolerance of dissent were common to other Communist leaders, and hence reﬂected emergency circumstances andParty culture as much as Stalin’s personal predisposition. As Chris Wardwrites, “Stalin’s personality cannot be divorced from the world in whichhe functioned.”
4Of course, it was Stalin who took the Party’s intolerance
of dissent to such extremes that he executed thousands of fellow Communists during the Great Purges of the late 1930s. The question ofStalin’s personal role, then, is one still very much debated by historians.
In the selection that follows, Ronald Grigor Suny, a specialist on Stalin
and Soviet nationalities, synthesizes old and new evidence regardingStalin’s method of rule and his personal imprint on the system that bearshis name. Suny maintains that, contrary to the totalitarian model, the Stalinist system did not completely control or atomize Soviet society.While Stalin concentrated enormous power at the top, that power wasdiffused downward through lower-level Soviet ofﬁcials. Factory directorsand collective farm managers had to accommodate workers and peasantsto some degree, and this accommodation left room for the average Sovietcitizen to maneuver within the system.
While he rejects the totalitarian model, Suny still emphasizes the
extremely negative characteristics of Stalinism and attributes these toStalin personally. He argues that Stalin drastically departed from Lenin’spolicies and practices; his article thus exempliﬁes the revisionist argument14 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
1Adam B. Ulam, Stalin:The Man and His Era (Boston, 1989); Anton Antonov-Ovseyenko,
The Time of Stalin: Portrait of a Tyranny , trans. George Saunders (New Y ork, 1980); Dmitrii
Volkogonov, Stalin:Triumph and Tragedy , trans. Harold Shukman (New Y ork, 1991).
2Leonard Schapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (New Y ork, 1960); T. H. Rigby,
Communist Party Membership in the U.S.S.R., 1917–1967 (Princeton, 1968). As Suny writes
in the selection below, Stalin was the ultimate “man of the machine.”
3Robert C. T ucker, Stalin in Power:The Revolution from Above 1928–1941 (New Y ork, 1990);
Michal Reiman, The Birth of Stalinism:The USSR on the Eve of the “Second Revolution,” trans.
George Saunders (London, 1987). For more on economic debates within the Party, seeAlexander Erlich, The Soviet Industrialization Debate 1924–1928 (Cambridge, Mass., 1960).
4Chris Ward, Stalin’s Russia (New Y ork, 1993), p. 32.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
that there was a fundamental discontinuity between Bolshevism and 
Stalinism. Suny highlights a range of areas – collectivization of the peas-antry, suppression of national minorities, cultural conservatism, and a turnaway from internationalism – where Stalin deviated from the original ori-entation of Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Indeed, as Suny points out, Stalineventually executed most of the original Bolsheviks during the GreatPurges, which made his break with Bolshevism even more complete.
In his discussion of the Great Purges, Suny stresses Stalin’s personal
mistrust and vindictiveness toward others. He cites Stalin’s letters de-manding the execution of alleged conspirators as well as Party leaders’accounts noting Stalin’s suspiciousness and insecurity. Quoting anotherscholar, he calls Stalin’s “gloomy personality” and “paranoid tendencies”crucial causes of Stalinist terror. He also concludes that, despite debatesamong historians about the political dynamics behind the Great Purges,that Stalin’s will and ambition were the principle catalyst. Through thepurges, Stalin established unlimited despotism over the Party as well asthe country. As Suny describes, a number of high-ranking Party membersopposed Stalin’s policies prior to the purges, but afterwards any opposi-tion to Stalin became unthinkable.
In addition to making the argument that Stalin personally shaped the
Stalinist system, Suny’s article provides a good overview of the Stalinperiod. He describes the “Stalin revolution” – Stalin’s elimination of privatetrade and creation of a state-run economy.This economic program, whichincluded the coercive collectivization of agriculture, facilitated rapid indus-trialization but caused great deprivation and suffering among the popula-tion. Suny also discusses another important element of Stalinism, the Stalincult – a propaganda effort that presented Stalin as a wise and charismaticleader. This cult bolstered Stalin’s legitimacy and helped establish him asLenin’s heir even as he deviated from Leninism in practice. After analyz-ing Stalin’s cultural conservatism and use of terror during the purges, Sunyturns ﬁnally to the Second World War and postwar years, which sawStalin’s power grow even greater.The exigencies of war promoted furtherconcentration of authority in Stalin’s hands, and the victory over NaziGermany raised Stalin’s stature to new heights. But as Suny notes, over-centralization and Stalin’s own mental deterioration exacerbated the mistrust and rigidity that plagued the Stalinist system.STALIN AND HIS STALINISM 15
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Stalin and his Stalinism: Power and
Authority in the Soviet Union,1930–1953
Ronald Grigor Suny
The deceptively simple question to be answered in this essay is: how did
Stalin rule? How did he maintain his authority while establishing a per-sonal autocracy? His extraordinary and brutal political achievementwas to act in the name of the Communist party and its central com-mittee against that party and central committee, while remaining theunchallenged head of party and state and, evidently , a vastly popularleader. At the end of the process his absolute grip on power allowed himto declare black white and completely reverse the foreign policy of theSoviet Union and the line of the Comintern by embracing Nazi Germanyin a non-aggression pact. The colossal and costly destruction he broughtupon the country on the eve and in the early days of the Second WorldWar gave rise to no organised opposition, and the centralised apparatusof control that he had created was not only able to weather the Naziinvasion but to organise a victory that would preserve the essence of thesystem he forged for another half-century .
The simplest, though inadequate, answer to the question, would 
be that Stalin’s power was maintained through the exercise of terror and monopolistic control of the means of communication throughoutsociety . Though certainly an important part of the answer, an exclu-sive focus on terror and propaganda does not explain how Stalin wonhis authority within the party in the 1920s and maintained it amonghis own supporters even before the advent of the Great Terror. Once initiated, terror operated through collaboration, and Stalin’s associatesalmost never attempted to free themselves from the source of their fears.Terror was supported by many within and outside the party whobelieved that extraordinary means against vicious and hidden enemieswere required. Tens of millions regarded Stalin as the indispensableleader of the ‘socialist’ camp, perhaps someone to be feared as was Ivangroznyi , a leader who ﬁlled the hearts of enemies with awe.
1...
The author wishes to express his gratitude to Lewis Siegelbaum and Moshe Lewin for
their careful and critical readings of earlier drafts.
1Michael Cherniavsky , ‘Ivan the Terrible as Renaissance Prince’, Slavic Review , 27, 2
(June 1968), pp. 195–211.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Building Hegemony in the 1930s
Though the relative peace, stability , and economic improvement of the
NEP years, in contrast to the preceding seven years of war, revolution,and civil war, had given the Leninist state a degree of acceptance andauthority in the eyes of many , that acceptance was fragile and based onthe compromises and limits of what the Communists almost invariablysaw as a transitional period, a temporary retreat from socialism. Thelaunching of the Stalin revolution, ﬁrst in the countryside and then inindustry , destroyed the basis of the regime’s fragile relationship with thegreat majority of the population (the smychka ) and created a new crisis
of legitimacy and authority .
By ending NEP and almost all private production and trade, Stalin
created the ﬁrst modern non-market, state-run economy , one thatsimultaneously eliminated rival sources of power and resistance to thewill of the central authorities. ‘Industrialists’ no longer held property inthe means of production. Workers could no longer effectively organisein order to raise the price of labour. Farmers could no longer withholdgrain to affect market prices. Yet all of these groups devised ways withinthe command economy to exercise limited degrees of power, autonomy ,and resistance. Workers, to take one example, were able to undermineharsh factory regimes by taking their skills, so desired by managers, toanother workplace. Bosses, caught between demands from above forhigher productivity , had to satisfy , however inadequately , some of theneeds and demands of their workers and even permit a degree of workerautonomy on the shop ﬂoor.
2Much of the time and effort of Soviet ofﬁ-
cials was concerned with raising output and productivity , and succes-sive state strategies required accommodations and concessions as oftenas additional pressure and repression.
3Thus, while power was actively
being concentrated at the top by Stalin, it was being diffused downwardand outward throughout the economic and political systems by thou-sands of vintiki (little screws) who had their own requirements for 
survival and ‘making out’. The state grew; in Moshe Lewin’s sense, it ‘swallowed’ society; but at the same time it was unable to realise the vision presented by totalitarian theory of complete atomisation ofsociety . The limits of state power were met when people refused to workSTALIN AND HIS STALINISM 17
2Hiroaki Kuromiya, Stalin’s Industrial Revolution: Politics and W orkers, 1928–1932 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1988).
3Much of the work of Lewis Siegelbaum has explored the various strategies by which
the regime attempted to raise productivity . See, for example, his ‘Soviet Norm Determi-nation in Theory and Practice, 1917–1941’, Soviet Studies , 36 (1984), pp. 48–67; 
and Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity in the USSR, 1935–1941 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 1988).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
efﬁciently , migrated from place to place by the millions, or informally
worked out ways to resist pressure from above.
Stalin came to power in the absence of a broad consensus on the legit-
imacy and necessity of his personal rule. Using the instruments of statepower to mobilise people in a grand programme of social transforma-tion, the regime conﬁdently conceived of itself as possessing a popularand historically sanctioned mandate and worked assiduously to increasesupport for itself through education and propaganda, leadership cults,election campaigns, broad national discussions (e.g., on the constitu-tion), public celebrations (like the Pushkin centennial of 1937), showtrials, and political rituals.
4Most importantly , the party/state made real
concessions to the populace and satisﬁed the ambitions and aspirationsof many (certainly not all) for social mobility and an improved livingstandard. Peasants who became workers and workers who becamemanagers and party bosses were moving up, while many of their enviedsocial ‘betters’ of the past were experiencing an enforced downwardmobility .
5
In the Stalinist formulation the ‘revolution from above’ of the 1930s,
though initiated by the state, was supported from below by millions ofpeasants and workers struggling to create a new society based on col-lective farms and socialist industry . The state-initiated industrialisa-tion of the 1930s mobilised millions of men and women into the mostmammoth building project in modern times, and a romance of damsand powerstations, new cities on the steppe and in Siberia, createdenthusiasts among the new workers and managers. The enormous dif-ﬁculties that the breakthrough into ‘socialism’ entailed – resistance fromfarmers, famine, economic bottlenecks and breakdowns – were seen asthe work of enemies and saboteurs, rather than inherent in the party’spolicies or a by-product of popular recalcitrance and massive coercion.Though the disjuncture between these forced images of imaginedharmony and purpose and the hardships and dislocations of actualworksites created unease among many who attempted to govern a vastcountry , the sheer scale of the transformation and its construction as ahuman epic engendered the broad social support that the regime hadsought for two decades.
618 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
4Christel Lane, The Rites of Rulers: Ritual in Industrial Society – the Soviet Case (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 1981).
5Social mobility has been a frequent theme in the work of Sheila Fitzpatrick. See, 
for example, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union, 1921–1934 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press 1979); and ‘Stalin and the Making of a New Elite,1928–1939’, Slavic Review , 38, 3 (September 1979), pp. 377–402.
6As the Harvard Project interviews in the early 1950s demonstrated, and as Donna
Bahry has emphasised in a recent study , ‘one of the cardinal values deﬁning the Soviet
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The naked exercise of unrestrained power was key to Stalin’s victory ,
but his regime simultaneously worked to create authority and accep-tance, borrowing from and supplementing the repertoire of justiﬁca-tions from Lenin’s day . While appropriating the mantle of Lenin andmuch of the rhetoric of Bolshevism, however, Stalin revised, suppressed,and even reversed much of the legacy of Lenin. Internationalism turned into nationalism; the smychka between the workers and the 
peasants was buried in the ferocity of collectivisation; radical trans-formation of the family and the place of women ended with reassertionof the most conservative ‘family values’. And in the process almost allof Lenin’s closest associates fell victim to the self-proclaimed keeper ofthe Leninist ﬂame.
Within ten years of his dispute with Lenin, Stalin transformed
nationality policy from a series of concessions to non-Russians into apowerful weapon of imperial state-building. He reversed Lenin’s focuson ‘Great Russian chauvinism’ as the principal danger in nationalityrelations and emphasised instead the dangers from the nationalism ofnon-Russians. In 1923, he turned on M. Kh. Sultan-Galiev , a formerassociate in Narkomnats and a spokesman for the aspirations of MuslimCommunists, accused him of national-uklonizm (national deviationism),
had him ‘tried’ before a party conference, arrested, and expelled fromthe party .
7Five years later, the state police ‘discovered’ a new plot, the
‘Sultan-Galiev counter-revolutionary organisation’, and in the nextdecade the OGPU and its successor, the NKVD, ‘unmasked’ dozens ofconspiratorial groups promoting nationalism from Ukraine to CentralAsia.
8In a letter to Levon Mirzoian, ﬁrst secretary of the Kazakh
kraikom , in 1933, Stalin called for intensifying the struggle against localSTALIN AND HIS STALINISM 19
system’s claim to legitimacy was industrial transformation . . . [R]apid industrialization
appeared to have near-universal backing’ (Donna Bahry , ‘Society Transformed? Rethink-ing the Social Roots of Perestroika’, Slavic Review , 52, 3 (Fall 1993), p. 524).
7Tainy natsional’noi politiki TsK RKP: ‘Chetvertoe soveshchanie TsK RKP s otvetstvennymi
rabotnikami natsional’nykh respublik i oblastei v g. Moskve 9–12 iiunia 1923 g.’: Stenogra-ﬁcheskii otchet (Moscow: Insan 1992); N. Tagirov , ‘Sultan-Galiev: Pravda i domysly’, Kom-
munist Tatarii , no. 9 (September 1989), pp. 68–76; ‘Shchitaem svoim revoliutsionnym
dolgom’, Kommunist Tatarii , no. 6 ( June 1990), pp. 51–5; Alexandre A. Bennigsen and
S. Enders Wimbush, Muslim National Communism in the Soviet Union: A Revolutionary
Strategy for the Colonial W orld (Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1979); Stephen
Blank, ‘Stalin’s First Victim: The Trial of Sultangaliev’, Russian History/Histoire Russe , 17,
2 (Summer 1990), pp. 155–78; Douglas Taylor Northrop, ‘Reconsidering Sultan-Galiev’,in Selected Topics in Soviet Ethnopolitics , eds. Gail Lapidus and Corbin Lydey (Berkeley: 
University of California 1992), pp. 1–44.
8‘V komissii Politbiuro TsK KPSS po dopolnitel’nomu izucheniiu materialov , sviazan-
nykh s repressiiami, imevshimi mesto v period 30–40-kh i nachala 50-kh godov’, Izvestiia
TsK KPSS , no. 9 (1990), pp. 71–6; ‘O tak nazyvaemom “national-uklonizme” ’, Izvestiia
TsK KPSS , no. 9 (1990), pp. 76–84.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Kazakh nationalism ‘in order to create the conditions for the sowing of
Leninist internationalism’.9Five years later, after having carried out
purges against Kazakh intellectuals and ‘deviationist’ party members,Mirzoian himself was arrested and executed.
10
Stalinism was both a revolutionising system, unwilling to accept
backward Russia as it was (and here it differs from many traditionallyauthoritarian dictatorships), and a conservative, restorative one,anxious to reestablish hierarchies, afﬁrm certain traditional values likepatriotism and patriarchy , and create political legitimacy based on morethan victorious revolution.
11The revolution and the restoration were
both evident in the 1930s, with the former powerfully present in theFirst Five-Year Plan period and the latter dominating in the middle1930s. The unresolved tensions between those aspects of Stalinism that extended the revolutionary egalitarian, participatory impulses of1917 and those that resurrected stratiﬁcation and authoritarianismremained in irresolvable tension with one another.
The ultimate ‘man of the machine’, Stalin was one of the least likely
candidates for charismatic hero. Short in stature, reticent in meetingsand on public occasions, neither a talented orator like Trotsky orZinoviev , nor an attractive and engaging personality , like Lenin orBukharin, Stalin did not himself project an image of a leader – until itwas created for him (and by him) through the cult. First the promotionof a cult of Lenin, which Stalin actively encouraged, then his identiﬁ-cation as a loyal Leninist, and eventually his merger with and substitu-tion for the image of Lenin were important props for Stalin’s authorityboth within the party and in society .
12All this was accomplished in a
political culture based on the pre-revolutionary Bolshevik traditions in20 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
9Ibid., p. 79.
10Boris Levytsky (comp.), The Stalinist Terror in the Thirties: Documentation from the Soviet
Press (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press 1974), pp. 176–9; Martha Brill Olcott, The
Kazakhs (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press 1987), pp. 218–19.
11Nowhere was this more evident than in the state’s shifting strategies toward women
and the family . See Wendy Z. Goldman, ‘Women, Abortion and the State, 1917–36’, inRussia’s W omen: Accommodation, Resistance, Transformation , eds. Barbara Evans Clements,
Barbara Alpern Engel, and Christine D. Worobec (Berkeley–Los Angeles: University ofCalifornia Press 1991); and her W omen, the State and Revolution: Soviet Family Policy and
Social Life, 1917–1936 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1993).
12Robert C. Tucker, ‘The Rise of Stalin’s Personality Cult’, American Historical Review ,
84, 2 (April 1979), pp. 347–66. A key role in the effort to link Stalin with the legacy ofLenin was played by Stalin’s assistant, Tovstukha, who worked in the Lenin Institute from1924 to 1926, helped edit the ﬁrst two volumes of Lenin’s collected works, edited theﬁrst nine editions of Stalin’s collection of articles Problemy leninizma , and wrote the ﬁrst
ofﬁcial Soviet biography of Stalin (1927) (Rosenfeldt, Knowledge and Power , pp. 170–4;
Pravda , 10 August 1935, pp. 1, 3; ‘I. B. Rusanova, I. P . Tovstukha. K 80-letiiu so dnia
rozhdeniia’, V oprosy istorii KPSS , no. 4 (1969), pp. 128–30).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
which emphasis on personality , the exaggerated importance of the
leader, and the attendant sacral notions of infallibility were all alien.
The ideological props of the Stalin dictatorship were both a radically
revised Marxism and a pro-Russian nationalism and etatism. Classwarfare was seen as inevitable and intensifying rather than diminish-ing as the country approached socialism. As long as the country was surrounded by hostile capitalist states, it was claimed, state power hadto be built up. When the Soviet Union was declared to be socialist byStalin in 1936, the positive achievement of reaching a stage of historyhigher than the rest of the world was tempered by the constantreminders that the enemies of socialism existed both within and out-side the country , that they are deceptive and concealed, and must be‘unmasked’. Repeated references to dangers and insecurity and to the need for ‘vigilance’ justiﬁed the enormous reliance on the ‘steelgauntlets of Ezhov’.
Inventing Opposition
The enthusiasm for industrialisation was tempered by much less
support for Stalin’s agrarian revolution. The open resistance to collec-tivisation among the peasants was reﬂected in less dramatic form byquiet forms of opposition within the party . The oligarchy that carriedout the Stalin revolution was a very narrow political elite but not onethat had effectively closed the party to debate and consideration ofalternatives. Between the fall of Bukharin in 1928–9 and the death ofKirov in December 1934, Stalin-faction rule produced and reproducedoppositions and potential oppositions. The real disagreements with theGeneral Line of rapid industrialisation and full collectivisation anddekulakisation were fuelled by the evident failures and costs of imple-menting these policies. In his own statements Stalin refused to acceptany blame for the economic chaos or the famine. Because ‘the last remnants of moribund classes’, some of whom had ‘even managed toworm their way into the party’, were actively sabotaging the building ofsocialism, more repression was needed.
The abolition of classes is not achieved by the extinction of the class strug-
gle, but its intensiﬁcation ...W e  m ust bear in mind that the growth of
the power of the Soviet state will intensify the resistance of the last remnants of the dying classes.
13STALIN AND HIS STALINISM 21
13Originally this was an idea put forth by Trotsky . I. V . Stalin, ‘Itogi pervoi piatiletki:
Doklad 7 ianvaria 1933 g.’, Sochineniia , 12, pp. 211–12.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In a letter replying to the Cossack writer Mikhail Sholokhov’s protests
against the systematic brutality of the grain collection, Stalin took ahard line:
One must take into account . . . the other side. And that other side
amounts to the fact that the respected corn-growers of your region (andnot only your region) have gone on a sit-down strike (sabotage!) andshown no concern about leaving the workers, the Red Army , withoutgrain. The fact that the sabotage was peaceful and outwardly bloodless inno way alters the realities – that the respected grain-growers have inessence carried out a ‘peaceful’ war with Soviet power. A war by starva-tion ( voina na izmor ), dear Comrade Sholokhov .
14
The growing gap between the public statements and images put forth
by the state, on the one hand, and the real destruction in the country-side, on the other, prompted prominent party members to resist thecover-up of the failures. Already in late 1930 some in the leadership ofthe RSFSR and the Transcaucasian federation expressed misgivings,which in turn were interpreted by the Stalin centre as a widespread and united oppositional tendency (the Syrtsov–Lominadze Right–LeftBloc).
15Swift retribution (demotion in these cases) did not deter a
number of other critical foci from emerging, notably the Riutin Platformand Appeal (1932) and the Smirnov , Tolmachev , and Eismont opposi-tion (1932). Within the Central Committee and the Politburo moremoderate elements opposed the rapid tempos in industry and proposeda more conciliatory attitude toward society , particularly the peasantry .22 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
14Quoted by Khrushchev , 8 March 1963; Pravda , 10 March 1963; Jonathan Haslam,
‘Political Opposition to Stalin and the Origins of the Terror in Russia, 1932–1936’, The
Historical Journal , 29, 2 (1986), p. 403.
15R. W . Davies, “The Syrtsov–Lominadze Affair’, Soviet Studies , 33, 1 ( January 1981),
pp. 29–50. Indicative of the mood in the party is a conversation with Lominadze reportedby a friend: ‘When I saw him, with another of his friends, in 1931, he was boldly critical of Stalin’s leadership. Now that opposition from both Left and Right had beensuppressed, he thought the next logical step was a radical reform of the Party and its personnel.
“What about the General Secretary?” asked his friend.“If there is a spring cleaning, every piece of furniture has to be removed, including the
biggest one.”
“But who could replace him?”“That’s up to the Congress.” It was time for younger men to take a share of the res-
ponsibility – men who had some practical experience but had been less involved in thestruggle between the factions.
Needless to say , this was extremely risky talk. It even occurred to me that Lominadze
saw himself as a suitable successor to Stalin’ (Joseph Berger, Shipwreck of a Generation:
The Memoirs of Joseph Berger (London: Harvill Press 1971); American edition: Nothing
But the Truth (New York: John Day 1971), p. 166).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The short-lived attempt to organise opposition to Stalin by
Martem’ian Ivanovich Riutin never went further than a few meetingsof like-minded party members, the formation of an organisation – theUnion of Marxist–Leninists, the discussion of Riutin’s report, ‘Stalin andthe Crisis of the Proletarian Dictatorship’, and an appeal to partymembers to join their efforts. Riutin condemned Stalin’s emerging dic-tatorship as the negation of the collective leadership of the Central Committee and the principal cause of the growing disillusionment ofthe people with socialism. He believed that the only way to save Bolshevism was to remove Stalin and his clique by force. If Riutin wasright that ‘the faith of the masses in socialism has been broken, its readi-ness to defend selﬂessly the proletarian revolution from all enemiesweakens each year’, then the regime had either to move immediatelytoward conciliation and the rebuilding of conﬁdence or turn to evenmore radical and repressive measures.
16
Riutin’s circle is an unusual instance of coherence and organisation
among those who opposed Stalin.”17Much more evident was a broad,
inchoate discontent with Stalin’s rule that permeated political and intel-lectual circles. Several loyal Stalinists, like Kaminskii, Kosior, Vareikis,and Bauman, harboured serious doubts about Stalin’s agricultural policies. Others, like Mykola Skrypnyk, a co-founder of the UkrainianCommunist Party who had sided with Stalin in the 1920s and early1930s, were critical of the growing ethnocentrism in the party and state and the evident pro-Russianness of Stalin’s nationality poli-STALIN AND HIS STALINISM 23
16On Riutin, see: ‘Stalin i krizis proletarskoi diktatury’ [Platform of the Union of
Marxist–Leninists (the Riutin Group)], Izvestiia TsK KPSS , no. 8 (1990), pp. 200–7; no.
9, pp. 165–83; no. 10, pp. 191–206; no. 11, pp. 161–86; no. 12, pp. 180–99, with com-mentary , pp. 200–2; M. Riutin, ‘Ko vsem chlenam VKP (b)’, reprinted in Osmyslit kult
Stalina , ed. Kh. Kobo (Moscow: Progress 1989), pp. 618–23; ‘O dele tak nazyvaemogo
“Soiuza Marksistov–Leninistev” ’, Izvestiia TsK KPSS , no. 6 (1989), pp. 103–15. See also,
the biography of Riutin by B. A. Starkov in Izvestiia TsK KPSS , no. 3 (1990), pp. 150–63,
followed by Riutin’s letters, pp. 163–78.
17The members of the Riutin group were arrested a few weeks after their ﬁrst meeting.
Riutin had been expelled from the party in 1930, and his seventeen associates wereexpelled by the Central Control Commission on 9 October 1932, for ‘having attemptedto set up a bourgeois, kulak organization to re-establish capitalism and, in particular, thekulak system in the USSR by means of underground activity under the fraudulent bannerof “Marxism–Leninism” ’. A number of accounts hold that Stalin demanded the deathpenalty for Riutin but was thwarted by Kirov and other moderates (Boris I. Nicolaevsky ,Power and the Soviet Elite: ‘The Letter of an Old Bolshevik’ and Other Essays (New York: 
Frederick A. Praeger 1965), pp. 3–65; Arkadii Vaksberg, ‘Kak zhivoi s zhivymi’, Litera-
turnaia gazeta , 29 June 1988; Lev Razgon, ‘Nakonets!’ Moskovskie novosti , 26 June 1988;
Dmitrii Volkogonov , Triumf i tragediia: Politicheskii portret I. V . Stalina , I, part 2 (Moscow:
Novosti 1989), pp. 85–6). Riutin was sentenced to ten years’ solitary conﬁnement. On10 January 1937, he was secretly tried and shot.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
cies.18Perhaps most ominously , tensions arose between the Red Army
commander, Mikhail Tukhachevskii, who called in 1930 for expansionof the armed forces, particularly aviation and tank armies, and Stalinand Voroshilov , who opposed what they called ‘Red militarism’.
19During
the famine in Ukraine high military ofﬁcers, like Iakir, angered Stalin byreporting their upset at peasant resistance, which, they felt, couldspread to the troops, and by demanding that more grain be kept in theregion.
20
Even among Stalin’s closest supporters there were fractures, though
their precise nature remains mysterious. The open disagreement at the Seventeenth Party Congress (January–February 1934) betweenOrjonikidze and Molotov over industrial targets was a rare public signof a deeper split between moderates and radicals.
21The popular Kirov ,
the only real rival left to Stalin by 1932, was in all his public and political appearances completely loyal to the General Secretary , thoughhe often emphasised the need for ‘revolutionary legality’, which wasunderstood to be a lessening of repressive measures.
22Stalin still repre-
sented for the majority of party members the militant turn towardsocialism – collectivisation, rapid industrialisation, the destruction oforganised political opposition. However, his personal proclivity towardthe use of force seemed to some to have gone beyond the broad boundsof Bolshevik practice.
The private letters from the vacationing Stalin to his closest comrade
Molotov (from 1930 and 1933) reveal in a striking way the less publiccharacteristics of the dictator and his methods of rule. He wrote short,terse memoranda to Molotov on the important matters that were beforethe Politburo, and apparently did the same with Kaganovich,Orjonikidze, and others. ‘From the boss ( khoziain ) we are receiving
regular and frequent directives’, Kaganovich wrote to Orjonikidze in1932.
23While he preferred to work through his own narrow circle of
friends – Molotov , who was his principal executor, Voroshilov , Mikoyan,24 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
18Skrypnyk committed suicide in 1933, as Ukrainian national communists were 
systematically being purged.
19R. W . Davies, The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia, 3: The Soviet Economy in 
Turmoil, 1929–1930 (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press 1989), pp. 446–7. In
May 1932 Stalin apologised to Tukhachevskii and endorsed some of his proposedreforms.
20Eventually some grain was sent to Ukraine in January 1933 along with the new party
boss, Postyshev .
21Kendall E. Bailes, Technology and Society under Lenin and Stalin: Origins of the Soviet 
Technical Intelligentsia, 1917–1941 (Princeton: Princeton University Press 1978), 
pp. 275–80; J. Arch Getty , Origins of the Great Purges (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press 1985), pp. 13–17.
22S. Kirov , Stati i rechi, 1934 (Moscow 1934).
23‘Pis’ma Stalina Molotovu’, p. 94.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Orjonikidze, Kaganovich – Stalin was quick to turn on any of them if he
felt challenged. In 1933 he severely criticised Orjonikidze for objectingto remarks by Vyshinskii that attacked those working in the industrialand agricultural ministries: ‘The behaviour of Sergo (and Iakovlev) inthe story of the “completeness of production” is impossible to call any-thing else but anti-party , because it has as its objective goal the defenceof reactionary elements of the party against the CC VKP(b).’
24Because
Kaganovich had sided with Orjonikidze, he too fell under Stalin’s wrath.Nothing came of this dispute at the time, nor of the more serious accu-sations made against Mikhail Kalinin.
The OGPU was carrying out investigations in 1930 into a series of
anti-Soviet ‘parties’ made up of former Mensheviks, industrial special-ists, and Ukrainian activists.
25Stalin received regular reports from
Iagoda and insisted that Molotov circulate them among the members ofthe Central Committee and the Central Control Commission, as well asamong ‘the more active of our khoziaistvenniki (economic managers)’.
He told Molotov that he was convinced that these conspiratorial elements were linked with the Rightists within the party .
It is absolutely essential to shoot Kondrat’ev , Groman and a pair of the
other bastards ( merzavtsy ) . . . It is absolutely essential to shoot the whole
group of wreckers in meat production and to publish this information inthe press.
26
He personally demanded the arrests of the former Menshevik Sukhanov ,
his Communist wife (who, he says, must have known what was goingon in their home), Bazarov , Ramzin, and others. The concocted storiesof anti-Soviet conspiracies were fed throughout the top bureaucracyand created an atmosphere of suspicion that justiﬁed the use of preciselythe kinds of harsh measures that Stalin advocated.
Fear and the need for vigilance, which were created both by the police
ﬁndings and by the real and imagined weaknesses and insecurities ofthe Soviet Union, bound the Communists together around the leaderwho projected an image of Bolshevik toughness. At the same time theStalinist settlement involved the creation of a highly hierarchical systemof rewards and privileges, of access to information and inﬂuence, that effectively disenfranchised the great mass of the population andprivileged a small number of party and state ofﬁcials, intellectuals, andmanagers. The end of rationing in 1934–5 forced everyone below the privileged upper levels of society to forage in government stores andpeasant markets for what they could afford. Social inequalities grew inSTALIN AND HIS STALINISM 25
24Ibid., p. 94.
25Ibid., p. 103.
26Ibid., p. 103.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
an economy of permanent shortages where money talked less effectively
than one’s position and personal connections. A ‘ruling class withouttenure’, in Lewin’s phrase,
27grew increasingly dependent on being in
favour with those even higher up. They were under a constant threat ofdemotion, expulsion from the party , arrest and even death. Their successrequired absolute and unquestioning obedience, enforcement of thedecisions from the top with determination, even ruthlessness, on thosebelow, and a willingness to acquiesce and participate in what can onlybe considered criminal activity (denunciations of the innocent, approvalof lawlessness, collaboration with a regime based on deception).
28Their
dilemma was that it was dangerous for them to be anything but res-ponsive to the top, and yet their position and requirements to increaseproduction and satisfy the demands of the top and the centre pulledthem toward making arrangements with the bottom and the periphery .
Conservative Revolutionary
Neither a consistent moderate nor radical, Stalin himself shifted from
centre-right (during his alliance with Bukharin in the mid-1920s) to left(during the period of the so-called ‘cultural revolution’ at the end of the1920s and the early 1930s) and then back to a more moderate positionaround 1931–2. Responding to a growing mood among party leadersconcerned with industry , Stalin announced in June 1931 a majorchange in the party’s wage policy (the end of uravnilovka , levelling the
wages, and the introduction of greater differentials between skilled and unskilled workers in order to end labour migration) and a muchmore tolerant and supportive policy toward the technical intelli-gentsia.
29Whether or not this policy shift was imposed on Stalin or 
corresponded to a genuine reevaluation of his position, during the nexthalf-decade he steadily began to reverse the more radical policies of theend of the 1920s and the early 1930s and pull back from egalitarian-ism and collectivism toward a promotion of hierarchy , cultural tradi-tionalism, and social conservatism that has come to be known as the‘Great Retreat’.26 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
27Moshe Lewin, ‘The Social Background of Stalinism’, in Stalinism: Essays in Historical
Interpretation , ed. Robert C. Tucker, (New York: W . W . Norton 1977), p. 130.
28Roi Medvedev , Oni okruzhali Stalina (Moscow 1990); English translation: All Stalin’s
Men (Garden City , NY: Doubleday 1984).
29I. V . Stalin, ‘Novaia obstanovka – novye zadachi khoziaistvennogo stroitel’stva’, Sochi-
neniia , 13 (Moscow: Gosudarstvennoe izdatel’stvo politicheskoi literatury 1951), pp.
51–80. Bailes shows how this conciliatory move was initiated by Orjonikidze and othersinvolved in industrial production ( Technology and Society , pp. 144–55).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
On a variety of fronts the Stalinists retreated from their forward posi-
tions of just a few years earlier. Though the collective farms remainedﬁrmly under the tutelage of the state and continued to operate essen-tially as grain-collection apparatuses,
30a series of decisions allowed the
collective-farm peasants to possess some livestock, to sell their surpluseson the market, and to own their houses and work household plots.While workers were increasingly restricted in their movements throughthe 1930s, an essentially ‘bourgeois’ system of remuneration wascreated: ‘from each according to his ability , to each according to hiswork’. Workers were encouraged to compete with one another in ordernot only to maximise output, but to win material rewards, and variouscollective forms of organising work and payment were eliminated.
31
Progressive piece-work was introduced in the spring of 1934, and whilereal wages fell for most workers a signiﬁcant number of udarniki (shock
workers) and stakhanovtsy participated in the more ‘joyous’ life that
Stalin had promised.
32Worker power declined and that of managers and
technicians increased.33‘The Party wanted the bosses to be efﬁcient,
powerful, harsh, impetuous, and capable of exerting pressure crudelyand ruthlessly and getting results “whatever the cost” . . . The forma-
tion of the despotic manager was actually a process in which not leadersbut rulers were made.’
34In the words of Mikhail Kaganovich, ‘The
ground must shake when the factory director enters the plant.’
The severe economic crisis of the winter of 1932–3, as well as the
coming to power of Hitler in Germany , helped accelerate the swingtoward state policies that favoured the educated and ambitious andeased the pressure on others. By the middle of the year arrests anddeportations declined; production targets for the Second Five-Year Planwere reduced; and consumer goods were given higher priority . As onehistorian sums it up:STALIN AND HIS STALINISM 27
30Moshe Lewin, ‘“Taking Grain”: Soviet Policies of Agricultural Procurements Before
the War’, The Making of the Soviet System: Essays in the Social History of Intenwar Russia
(New York: Pantheon 1985), pp. 142–77. ‘Peasants in Stalin’s times were indeed legallybound to their place of work, submitted to a special legal regimen, and – through thekolkhoz – to a form of collective responsibility with regard to state duties. They weretransformed, not unlike as in pre-emancipation times, into an estate placed at the verybottom of the social ladder’ (p. 176).
31Lewis H. Siegelbaum, ‘Production Collectives and Communes and the “Imperatives”
of Soviet Industrialization, 1929–1931’, Slavic Review , 45, 1 (Spring 1986), pp. 65–84.
32Lewis H. Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity in the USSR,
1935–1941 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1988), particularly chapter 6,
‘Stakhanovites in the Cultural Mythology of the 1930s’.
33Hiroaki Kuromiya, Stalin’s Industrial Revolution , pp. 50–77.
34Moshe Lewin, ‘Society , State, and Ideology during the First Five-Year Plan’, in Cultural
Revolution in Russia, 1928–1931 , ed. Sheila Fitzpatrick (Bloomington: Indiana Univer-
sity Press 1978), p. 74.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In the mid-1930s Soviet society struck a balance that would carry it
through the turmoil of the purges, the Great War and reconstruction. Thecoercive policies of the Cultural Revolution [1928–31] were replaced or supplemented by the use of inducements. Beneﬁts were quickly ap-parent: education opened professional opportunities; a stable countrysideimproved dietary standards; increased production and income encour-aged consumerism. A lightened mood swept the nation. Women woremake-up; young people revived ballroom dancing. Life, as Stalin said, and Lebedev-Kumach’s popular song repeated, had become better andhappier.
35
A new Soviet middle class developed with its own form of ‘bourgeois
values’. More attention was paid to private life. From Stakhanoviteworkers, with their newly acquired bicycles and wristwatches, to factorymanagers and their wives, who were on the receiving end of Stalin’s ‘BigDeal’, a certain level of security and material improvement, ‘a sense ofpride and participation’, wedded them to the order created by Stalin.
36
James van Geldern emphasises how Soviet citizens were turned 
into spectators in the 1930s, rather than active participants. Formal,meaningless voting, viewing the leaders atop Lenin’s mausoleum, were‘rituals of participation’, public observations of political spectacles.
37
New heroes, from aviators to polar explorers, and extended publicdramas – like the rescue of downed female ﬂiers and ice-bound sailors– riveted public attention and reinforced the values of the modernisingparty/state. An empire was created disguised as a voluntary federationof free peoples, with a reconstructed Moscow at its centre, and festivalsof reafﬁrmation, like the Moscow Olympiad of Folk Music, periodicallyreminding people of the unbreakable unity of a diverse, continent-sizecountry . Ideas of progress – the conquest of recalcitrant nature, theovercoming of peasant ‘darkness’ and the isolation of remote villages,the building of the Moscow Metro – enhanced the heroic nature ofSoviet leaders and the efforts of the Soviet people. Sacriﬁce and vigilancewent along with pride in nashi dostizheniia (our achievements). The
image of the motherland ( rodina ) was revived, gradually displacing that
of the international community of proletarians, until in 1943 Stalincavalierly dissolved Lenin’s Third International. In 1939, he had pro-28 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
35James van Geldern, ‘The Centre and the Periphery: Cultural and Social Geography in
the Mass Culture of the 1930s’, in New Directions in Soviet History , ed. Stephen White,
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1992), p. 62.
36Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity , pp. 210–46. The idea of the
‘Big Deal’, Stalin’s exchange of material goods and security for loyalty , is the theme ofVera Dunham, In Stalin’s Time: Middleclass Values in Soviet Fiction (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press 1976).
37Van Geldern, “The Centre and the Periphery’, p. 71.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
posed, as a joke to Ribbentrop: ‘Let’s drink to the new anti-Cominternist
– Stalin!’38
In his public rhetoric of these years Stalin maintained his severity and
toughness, qualities that had long been part of Bolshevik culture, butshowed that under pressure he could be more ﬂexible and accommo-dating. He seemed not only a competent commander to many but indeedan indispensable leader in a time of political stress and economic crisis.A high party ofﬁcial, Barmin, wrote about this period (1932): ‘Loyaltyto Stalin was based principally on the conviction that there was no oneto take his place, that any change of leadership would be extremely dan-gerous, and that the country must continue in its present course, sinceto stop now or attempt a retreat would mean the loss of everything.’
39
Rumours that Stalin, had suggested that he resign (probably after thesuicide of his second wife, Nadezhda Allilueva, in November 1932) wereembellished by reports of his associates rallying around him.
40
The years of upheaval and uncertainty of the early 1930s were
clearly coming to an end by the opening of the Seventeenth Party Con-gress in late January 1934. Though the full story has yet to be told, thereappears to have been a movement at the Congress to replace Stalin withKirov , but Kirov’s differences with Stalin were not great enough for theLeningrad leader to repudiate the General Secretary as many otherswished. Though many still feared the trend toward personal autocracyby Stalin, the oligarchic bureaucratic system seemed more secure thanever; oppositions had been rendered impotent; and a new emphasis on‘revolutionary legality’ seemed to promise a more orderly , procedural,less disruptive mode of governance. But, as Lewin notes:
Stalin was not ready to accept the role of just a cog, however powerful, in
his own machine. A top bureaucrat is a chief executive, in the frameworkof a constraining committee . . . But Stalin had had the power, and theSTALIN AND HIS STALINISM 29
38Sto sorok besed s Molotovym: Iz dnevnika F . Chueva (Moscow: Terra 1991), p. 19; Molotov
Remembers: Inside Kremlin Politics: Conversations with Felix Chuev , ed. Albert Resis
(Chicago: Ivan R. Dee 1993), p. 12.
39A. Barmin, One Who Survived (New York, 1945). When the Menshevik Fedor Dan
asked Bukharin in 1936 why he and other communists had so blindly trusted Stalin,Bukharin answered, ‘You don’t understand this; it is completely different. It is not he whois trusted but a man whom the party trusts; it happened that he became a kind of symbolof the party , [and] the lower ranks, the workers, the people believe in him; maybe this isour fault but that is how it happened, that is why we all climb into his mouth ...k n o wing
for sure that he will eat us. And he knows this and only chooses the right moment’ (‘Onpozhret nas’, from the archive of L. O. Dan in the Institute of Social History , Amsterdam,published in Osmyslit’ kult Stalina , ed. Kobo, p. 610).
40On Stalin’s relationship with his second wife, see ‘ “Nadezhde Sergeevne Alliluevoi,
lichno ot Stalina” (Perepiska 1928–1931 godov)’, Istochnik: Dokumenty russkoi istorii , 
no. 0 (1993), pp. 9–22.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
taste for it – for ever more of it – since he had led the early stage of the
shattering breakthrough and gotten full control over the state in theprocess. At this point, the traits of his gloomy personality , with clear paranoid tendencies become crucial. Once at the top and in full con-trol, he was not a man to accept changes in the pattern of his personalpower . . . He therefore took the road of shaking up, of destabilising themachinery and its upper layers, in order to block the process fatallyworking against his personal predilection for autocracy .
41
T error and Autocracy
The half-dozen years before the murder of Kirov (December 1934)
might be seen as the prehistory of Stalinism, the period of formation ofthe political structures and social conditions that created the possibilityfor a regime of extreme centralisation of power, overwhelming domi-nance of a weakened society , and particular ferocity . The unlimiteddespotism of Stalinism was the product of the Great Purges, whichsimultaneously eliminated all possible resistance and created a new andmore loyal elite with which the tyrant could rule.
There is no consensus among scholars as to the motivations behind
the Purges. Interpretations range from the idea that purging was a per-manent and necessary component of totalitarianism in lieu of elections(Zbigniew Brzezinski) to seeing the Great Terror as an extreme form ofpolitical inﬁghting (J. Arch Getty).
42Dissatisfaction with Stalin’s rule
and with the harsh material conditions was palpable in the mid-1930s,and the regime was faced with the difﬁculties of controlling the familycircles and local feudatories (particularly in the union republics). One ofthe effects of the Purges was the replacement of an older political andeconomic elite with a younger, potentially more loyal one.
43The largest
number were promoted workers and party rank-and-ﬁle, young techni-cians, who would make up the Soviet elite through the post-Stalin perioduntil the early 1980s.
44‘Stalin – and, for that matter, the majority of
Soviet citizens’, writes Sheila Fitzpatrick,30 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
41Lewin, ‘The Social Background of Stalinism’, pp. 130–1.
42Getty , Origins of the Great Purges , p. 206. For a range of views on the purges, particu-
larly of the so-called ‘revisionists’, see J. Arch Getty and Roberta T . Manning (eds.) Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1993).
43A. L. Unger, ‘Stalin’s Renewal of the Leading Stratum: A Note on the Great Purge’,
Soviet Studies , 20,3 (January 1969), pp. 321–30; Bailes, Technology and Society , pp.
268–71, 412–13; Sheila Fitzpatrick, ‘Stalin and the Making of a New Elite, 1928–1939’,Slavic Review , 38, 3 (September 1979), pp. 377–402.
44Bailes criticises Fitzpatrick for not distinguishing between those who rose into the
intelligentsia through formal education, many of whom were workers (the vydvizhentsy ),
and the praktiki , who were elevated through their work experience (‘Stalin and the
Making of a New Elite: A Comment’, Slavic Review , 39, 2 (June 1980), pp. 286–9).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
saw the cadres of the mid-1930s less in their old role as revolutionaries
than in the current role as bosses. There is even some evidence that Stalinsaw them as Soviet boyars (feudal lords) and himself as a latter-day Ivanthe Terrible, who had to destroy the boyars to build a modern nation stateand a new service nobility .
45
Yet neither arguments from social context nor functionalist deduc-
tions from effects to causes have successfully eliminated the principalcatalyst to the Terror, the will and ambition of Stalin. The Great Purgeshave been seen traditionally as an effort ‘to achieve an unrestricted personal dictatorship with a totality of power that [Stalin] did not yetpossess in 1934.’
46Stalin guided and prodded the arrests, show trials,
and executions forward, aided by the closest members of his entourage:Molotov , Kaganovich, Zhdanov , Malenkov , Mikoyan, and Ezhov .
47Here
personality and politics merged, and the degree of excess repression wasdictated by the peculiar demands of Stalin himself, who could not tolerate limits on his will set by the very ruling elite that he had broughtto power.
48
Whatever his authentic political aspirations, Stalin was marked by 
his deep suspiciousness and insecurity . As Bukharin told the old Mensheviks Fedor and Lydia Dan, Stalin
is even unhappy because he cannot convince everyone, and even himself,
that he is greater than everyone, and this is his unhappiness, perhaps the most human feature in him, perhaps the only human feature in him, but already not human. Here is something diabolical: because of hisgreat ‘unhappiness’ he cannot but avenge himself on people, on allSTALIN AND HIS STALINISM 31
45Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1982), p.
159. Comparisons to the Russian past – autocracy , the service nobility , the collective-farmpeasantry as serfs – are used metaphorically by Moshe Lewin and are central to the analysis of Robert C. Tucker in Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1928–1941
(New York: W . W . Norton 1973).
46Robert C. Tucker, ‘Introduction’, in The Great Purge Trial eds. Tucker and Stephen F .
Cohen (New York 1965), p. xxix. This is essentially the argument of the second volumeof his Stalin biography , as well as the view of Robert Conquest in The Great Terror: Stalin’s
Purge of the Thirties (New York: Macmillan 1968); The Great Terror: A Reassessment (New
York: Oxford University Press 1990).
47Boris A. Starkov , ‘Narkom Ezhov’, in Stalinist Terror , eds. Getty and Manning, 
pp. 21–39.
48Stalin’s personal involvement in the details of the Terror has been indisputably demon-
strated by archival documents released in the late 1980s and early 1990s. One such noteto Ezhov will sufﬁce to give the type of intervention that the vozhd ’ engaged in. In May
1937, he wrote: ‘One might think that prison for Beloborodov is a podium for readingspeeches, statements which refer to the activities of all sorts of people but not to himself.Isn’t it time to squeeze this gentleman and make him tell about his dirty deeds? Where is he, in prison or in a hotel?’ ( Dialog (Leningrad), no. 4 (1990), p. 21; cited in Starkov ,
‘Narkom Ezhov’, p. 29).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
people, but especially on those who are somehow higher, better than 
h e...49
The Purges destroyed primarily those in power. ‘It is one of the 
mysteries of Stalinism’, Lewin summarises,
that it turned much of the fury of its bloody purges against this very real
mainstay of the regime. There were among the apparaty , probably , still too
many former members of other parties or of the original Leninist party ,too many participants and victors of the civil war who remembered whohad done what during those days of glory . Too many thus could feel theright to be considered founders of the regime and base on it part of theclaims to a say in decisions and to security in their positions. Probably ,also letting the new and sprawling administration settle and getencrusted in their chairs and habits could also encourage them to try andcurtail the power of the very top and the personalised ruling style of thechief of the state – and this was probably a real prospect the paranoidleader did not relish.
50
Stalin’s initiation and personal direction of the Purges was the 
catalyst to thousands of smaller settlings of scores.51In the context of
deep and recurring social tensions the state gave the green light toresentments against the privileged, the intelligentsia, other ethnicities,outsiders. The requirement to ﬁnd enemies, to blame and punish,worked together with self-protection and self-promotion (and plainsadism) to expand the Purges into a political holocaust. At the end theSoviet Union resembled a ruined landscape, seriously weakened eco-nomically , intellectually , and militarily , but at the same time dominatedby a towering state apparatus made up of new loyal apparatchiki , disci-
plined by the police, and presided over by a single will.
Victory and Decline, Finale and Conclusion
By the outbreak of the Second World War the central government, the
military , the republics and local governments, the economic infrastruc-ture had all been brutally disciplined. Obedience and conformity hadeliminated most initiative and originality . Ruling through his like-minded lieutenants, Stalin relied on specialists whenever he needed32 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
49‘On pozhret nas’, p. 610.
50Moshe Lewin, ‘Grappling with Stalinism’, The Making of the Soviet System , pp. 
308–9.
51Sheila Fitzpatrick, ‘How the Mice Buried the Cat: Scenes from the Great Purges of
1937 in the Russian Provinces’, Russian Review , 52, 3 (July 1993), pp. 299–320.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
expertise or greater competence. After decimating the high command 
of the armed forces, his control over his military was greater than Hitler over his, at least at the beginning of the war. He intervened andinterfered in both minute and major decisions, and was often abrupt and threatening, yet he was more willing to rely on his generals thanwas Hitler, who became progressively more involved with operationalcommand and more contemptuous of the military leaders. ‘Hitler’s gen-erals’, writes Severyn Bialer, ‘exercised less inﬂuence on the decisions oftheir High Command at the moment they were most able to act effec-tively; Stalin’s generals exercised more’.
52Stalin stood at the centre of
all strategic, logistical, and political decisions. He was chairman of theState Defence Committee, which included the highest party ofﬁcials(Molotov , Beria, Malenkov , Voroshilov , Kaganovich, and later Voznesen-skii and Mikoyan); the chairman of Stavka, the supreme military head-quarters; General Secretary of the party and chairman of the Politburo;chairman of the Council of Ministers and People’s Commissar ofDefence. Real business often took place in late-night meetings at Stalin’sapartment or dacha, and the exigencies of total war reinforced andaccelerated the centralisation of power.
53
Ofﬁcial propaganda convincingly identiﬁed the victory over Nazism
with the superiority of the Soviet system, its organic link with rodina (the
motherland), and the personal genius of Stalin. The triumph overfascism provided the Communists with another source of legitimationand authority . New Russia and the Soviet Union were melded into asingle image. Patriotism and accommodation with established religiousand national traditions, along with the toning down of revolutionaryradicalism, contributed to a powerful ideological amalgam that out-lasted Stalin himself. In the post-war decades the war became the centralmoment of Soviet history , eclipsing the revolution and the velikii perelom
of the early 1930s.
54And though there would be sporadic uses of
repression and terror against individuals or groups (the ‘LeningradAffair’ of 1947, the ‘Doctors’ Plot’ of 1953), as well as a series of ethnicdeportations of repatriated Armenians, Kurds, Meskhetian Turks, andSTALIN AND HIS STALINISM 33
52Severyn Bialer, Stalin and His Generals (New York: Pegasus 1969), p. 43. ‘ As supreme
head of army command, Hitler was centrally involved in the formulation of day-to-daytactics in a way which occupied no other head of state during the Second World War. For the German army , this was catastrophic. The command structure which he haddevised placed him in charge of both the general management of military campaignsand its detailed tactics’ (Ian Kershaw, Hitler (London and New York: Longman 1991), 
p. 175).
53Milovan Djilas, Conversations with Stalin (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World 1962),
passim.
54Nina Tumarkin, “The Great Patriotic War as Myth and Memory’, Atlantic Monthly ,
267, 6 (June 1991), pp. 26, 28, 37, 40, 42, 44.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
others, no massive terror on the scale of 1937 was employed after the
war.
Whatever beneﬁts accrued to the Soviet system from the unity of
decision-making at the top must be weighed against the costs of over-centralisation and the resultant paralysis lower down in the apparatus.In the years of the Cold War, as Stalin deteriorated physically and men-tally , the entire country – its foreign policy , internal politics, cultural life,and economic slowdown – reﬂected the moods of its leader and wasaffected by his growing isolation, arbitrariness, and inactivity . No onecould feel secure. The ruling elite was concerned with plots, intrigues,and rivalries between Stalin’s closest associates, the rise and fall ofclients and patrons. ‘ All of us around Stalin’, writes Khrushchev , ‘weretemporary people. As long as he trusted us to a certain degree, we were allowed to go on living and working. But the moment he stoppedtrusting you, Stalin would start to scrutinize you until the cup of his distrust overﬂowed.’
55In his last years Stalin turned against Molotov
and Mikoyan, grew suspicious of Beria, Voroshilov , Kaganovich, andMalenkov . Khrushchev overheard him say , ‘I’m ﬁnished. I trust no one,not even myself.’
56
The Stalinist system was restored and consolidated after the devasta-
tion of the war years. As a single political cultural synthesis becamehegemonic and the more disruptive violence of the pre-war periodreceded, pervasive fear, which disciplined people into obedient silence,coexisted with genuine acceptance of the system. The ﬁgure of Stalinstood symbolically for ideal behaviour in an ideal society . Enemies werestill omnipresent; a single simpliﬁed reading of historical reality was athand in the Kratkii kurs (the short history of the Communist party) and
the ofﬁcial biography of Stalin; and the USSR was still the future in thepresent.
Further Reading: Stalin
Isaac Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography , 2nd edn. (New York, 1966).
Lars T . Lih, Oleg V . Naumov , and Oleg V . Khlevniuk, eds., Stalin’s Letters to
Molotov (New Haven, 1995).
Norman M. Naimark, “Cold War Studies and New Archival Materials on
Stalin,” The Russian Review , vol. 61, no. 1 (2002).
Alfred J. Rieber, “Stalin, Man of the Borderlands,” American Historical Review ,
vol. 106, no. 5 (2001).34 RONALD GRIGOR SUNY
55Khrushchev Remembers , trans. and ed. Strobe Talbott (Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
1970), p. 307.
56Ibid.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Robert C. Tucker, Stalin in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1928–1941 (New
York, 1990).
Adam B. Ulam, Stalin: The Man and His Era (Boston, 1989).
Dmitrii Volkogonov , Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy , trans. Harold Shukman 
(New York, 1991).STALIN AND HIS STALINISM 35
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Social Origins
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
2
Grappling with Stalinism
Moshe Lewin
Excerpted from Moshe Lewin, “Grappling with Stalinism,” in
Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System: Essays in the Social History
of Interwar Russia (New Y ork: Pantheon Books, 1985).
Editor’s Introduction
Traditionally, historians in all ﬁelds focused on elite politics – the lives of
rulers, the decisions of statesmen, the ideas of philosophers. In the caseof Soviet history, scholars wrote biographies of Stalin and histories of theCommunist Party. But beginning in the 1960s, many historians turned tosocial history – the lives and behaviors of the common people. Social historians believed that common peasants and workers also deserved tobe studied, and that their mentalities, attitudes, and actions helped toshape history. By the 1970s and 1980s, scholars of the Soviet Union alsobegan to examine social history, and to look beyond the ideas and actions of Communist Party leaders to explain the October Revolution and Stalinism.
As discussed in the introduction, social history in the Soviet ﬁeld was
attached to revisionism – the scholarly trend that overturned the totali-tarian model. Revisionist scholars presented Soviet society as more thana collection of passive, atomized individuals whose thoughts and behav-ior were completely controlled by the state. Revisionists who studied theOctober Revolution highlighted the role of workers and the ways in whichtheir support for the Bolsheviks (Communists) played a crucial role in the establishment of the Soviet government. This scholarship altered thetotalitarian view that the Bolsheviks seized power in an illegitimate coupd’état with no popular backing. It also called into question the assump-tion that Stalinism followed automatically from Bolshevism, and requireda new explanation for the origins of Stalinism.
Moshe Lewin is a leading revisionist scholar and pioneer in the 
social history of Stalinism. While he does not ignore the importance ofhigh politics, and in fact has written on political struggles within the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Communist Party leadership, his work seeks to place Stalinism in its
broader social context. Lewin thus goes beyond narrow studies of theCommunist Party to examine the character of Soviet society, and socialinﬂuences on the Soviet state. For Lewin, it was the interplay betweenthe state and society that shaped fundamental aspects of Stalinism. TheSoviet state had the power to initiate social change, as it did with collec-tivization, but the social turmoil that resulted and the nature of societyitself profoundly affected the Stalinist system.
In the selection below, Lewin emphasizes the overwhelmingly peasant
character of Soviet society and its contribution to Stalinism. He pointsout that peasants made up the vast majority of the population, and thatmillions of peasants migrated to cities during Stalinist collectivization andindustrialization in the early 1930s. This mass migration meant that evenmany urban residents, including industrial workers, students, and Sovietofﬁcials, were in fact former peasants who had just recently left their villages. Peasant in-migrants, according to Lewin, were ill-equipped to dealwith modern urban life, and relied upon their traditional peasant ways ofthinking even in the city. He describes the Russian peasant (or muzhik ) as
at best semi-literate and having a mentality based on religion tinged withmagic and sorcery. Because the Soviet government had to accommodatethis widespread peasant mentality, it resorted to quasi-religious formssuch as the Stalin cult – propaganda that deiﬁed Stalin.
Another detrimental social force identiﬁed by Lewin was a new class
of bureaucrats (or apparaty ). These bureaucrats sought to enhance their
own power and privileges, and in the process contributed to the rigidityand hierarchy of the Stalinist system. Of course many bureaucrats and even high-ranking Communist Party ofﬁcials were subsequently shotduring the Great Purges, so their elite status did not last. Lewin describesthe Great Purges as a type of demonology, whereby Party ofﬁcials wereunmasked as “enemies of the people.” At show trials, purge victims weredepicted as sinners who had strayed from the Party line and becomeinvolved in treasonous activities against the Soviet government. WhileLewin notes that this secular inquisition was orchestrated by Stalin, heargues that it appealed to a population made up of peasants and formerpeasants who remained superstitious and ready to blame the country’shardships on evil forces and demons.
Lewin thus concludes that the primitivized condition of Soviet society
contributed to Stalinism. The Soviet population was made up primarily of uneducated peasants, and the country’s underdeveloped economic and social structures were further weakened by the Civil War and thebrutalities of collectivization. Rapid industrialization and urbanization only exacerbated the situation in the short run, as uprooted peasantsﬂooded the cities, bringing with them rural superstitions and uncultured40 MOSHE LEWIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
behavior. This population was not ready to support democracy or social-
ism. Instead it bred authoritarianism, as the state took control of all economic and social functions, and Stalin himself assumed complete autocratic power.GRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 41
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Grappling with Stalinism
Moshe Lewin
An Enigma
Rather than deal with the phenomenon of Stalinism in any exhaustive
way , the aim here is to introduce into the study and discussion of thesystem and period in Soviet history some elements, not necessarily original, that have not been fully “employed” yet in our search for anadequate explanation of what still continues to be, to a large extent,enigmatic. Facts and ideas derived from the study of the social historyof Russia prompts one to get more “historical” in thinking about Russia,to incorporate factors from the past which, it may turn out, were stillunextinguished and mightily at work in the earlier stages of the regimeand not yet fully accounted for as driving forces that shaped events andstructures about to follow .
In fact, a statement like that may even sound a bit trite. But it is a fact
that most of the thinking about Russia turned to some general conceptsand to political and ideological factors that looked more attractive and,somehow, pushed historical insights aside. Some of those attitudes andtheses acquired even the dubious status of obsessions and outright fallacies. One widespread approach insisted on Leninism – and on theLeninist conception of party organization – as the root of Stalinism andStalin. The former seemed to have implied the latter, carrying the nextstage in its womb almost by deﬁnition. Thus Leninism, a political ideol-ogy , is presented as the main “culprit” – the primary cause of a speciﬁcunfolding of Russian postrevolutionary history , a demiurge that exhibitsits potential, explains itself, and makes history – without much of aninput from social and historical factors. It was lost on many observersthat powerful factors were at work, before and after the revolution, thatshaped events, leadership, and ideology itself, and they could haveaffected Leninism and Stalinism in different ways, including the ways thetwo phenomena related to each other. The aura of a successful revolution – or, if one was opposed to it, its opprobrium – contributed to the not uncommon phenomenon of singling out an outstanding eventfor its intense heat and spectacular quality and seeing in it an absolutedivide in historical development, which supposedly cut the links with thepast radically . Wasn’t this the essence of what was aimed at – and heldfrom now on to be solely responsible for all the future chapters? In the
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
eyes of some of the participants, it actually was responsible only for the
nicer things that followed, the less palatable being put at the doorsteps ofeither “deviations” or “vestiges of the past,” which were bound to dis-appear without a trace anyway . Eric Hobsbawm pointed to the fallaciesthat overconcentration on revolutions or similar shattering events can beget. And one could add more fallacies that stem from abusing the portmanteau device of “vestiges of the past,” of which some Soviet writers are still very fond. Religion, greed for predominantly mate-rial possessions, criminal behavior – these are some examples of the sup-posed “vestiges” for which the regime did not wish to carry the blame.Western scholars rarely “bought” this later type of explanation, but theydid often accept the impact of revolution as a quasi-absolute breakingpoint and perpetuated it in their specializations and departmental divi-sions, thus causing a considerable loss in interpretative power.
Another widespread approach, mostly interested in leaders, resulted
in a set of one-sided conclusions which are to be expected whenever personal ambition and power struggles at the top of the social and politi-cal ladder are made into the very substance of historical inquiry .Unavoidably , fascination with the mighty and highly visible makesdeeply seated matrices of social relations and profound cultural andlong-term economic trends less interesting or, at best, relegates them tothe background.
Overreliance on certain types of class analysis by Bolsheviks and their
heirs, as well as by some scholars abroad, also became a source of con-siderable political and conceptual difﬁculties, especially for the actorsand leaders of the events in Russia. An all too eager “application” of aclass analysis taken from an armory developed in and for a ratheradvanced capitalist society , when tried in a society still in the early stagesof some expected course of history , in transition or in ﬂux, where amixture of forms coexisted or meshed, could easily misﬁre. Tsarist Russiawas exhibiting precisely such traits, and the new Soviet rulers still used the same analytical tools and desperately tried to discern in theirpostrevolutionary society either full-blown classes or at least theirclearly discernable preﬁguration which could lead to the preferredfuture or drive the system dangerously back into restoration. This wasdone in order to gain an insight into the historical process and use it asbasis for policy making, but it remains a fact that the postrevolutionarySoviet leadership often looked the other way , in the wrong direction,made a long list of blunders, and, at a later stage, especially during thegreat purges, ended up compromising the analytical tools altogether bymonumentally abusing them.
Again, the analysis suffered either because society after the civil war
was too undifferentiated, too homogenous, or too archaic or else, as inGRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 43
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the early 1930s, too unsettled by a state of ﬂux and upheavals to yield
credible results to a scrutiny misguided by inappropriate concepts.
E. H. Carr also thought that Marxian class analysis was inoperative
in the Soviet conditions, although for a different reason: It was not thisor another ruling class that dominated Soviet society but rather the statethat played the dominant role and made or unmade the social structure,without itself yielding to such domination or to a class analysis. Carr’sreasoning reﬂected a reality which became, appropriately , a center ofanalysis in the study of Eastern European regimes, tsarist and Sovietincluded. The growing role of the state in the advanced capitalist anddemocratic systems added justiﬁcation to this kind of focus for the devel-oping countries.
There is no intention to declare the approaches mentioned here to be
irrelevant or not worthy of pursuing. It is rather this or another form ofexaggeration or overemphasis that is contested, and what is underlinedis the need to reﬁne the tools, or to introduce new, indispensable dataand additional factors. In the case of the state, too, it is the overcon-centration on it that is deplored, which leads to unilateral interpreta-tions making it into more autonomous a factor than it actually was oris, into a mold that is not shaped by anything but itself, and into aprimary cause that develops and changes by its own devices. That a statecan be mighty and dominate the social system, especially at some spe-ciﬁc breakthrough periods, is beyond doubt. Situations when the statedoes unleash itself and acts as a powerful and destructive break on socialdevelopment were observed often enough, as well as being a primemover and agent of development. But absolutizing such an interpreta-tion would overpoliticize the analysis, obscure what a longer-term viewcould well disprove or, at least, seriously modify . A temporary , seemingunshackling of constraints is not really a license for full freedom ofaction. One can claim that state-induced – or accelerated – social andeconomic changes would end up in imposing adaptations on state insti-tutions and on the whole state system itself; constraints on them notonly do exist but actually form a system of which the state is a part andwhich limit, frustrate, or otherwise circumscribe its operations. Eco-nomic, social, and cultural phenomena have to be introduced into theanalysis, even if the object of study is a powerful and arbitrary destruc-tive despot. The validity of such historical interpretation does not stopwhen human rights are curtailed and when oppressive bureaucraciestake over the forefront of the stage.
Our treatment cannot offer any full-ﬂedged analysis that would aim
at correcting all the aforementioned shortcomings. But the need to do so is worth underlining. Historical studies can help to restore thebalance and come up with more satisfactory interpretations by exercis-44 MOSHE LEWIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ing some of the arcana of their métier, telling the story of events but
also sorting out trends, dealing with ideologies but without detachingthem from institutions and social structures, studying personalitieswithout forgetting the networks of their helpers as well as the broadermasses even if some leaders are scornful of them, and dealing withstates as important parts of social systems that change in them and withthem. . . .
The Muzhik – a Headache Again
By the end of the 1920s the day of reckoning seemed to be nearing.
Debates on strategy of development, unavoidably enmeshed in a contestfor power, and ideological battles with the very soul of the regime atstake, turned around three main planks: (1) how to industrialize, (2)without making the peasantry explode and (3) without letting state and party get out of hand. The last point turned around the characterof the system and its by now obvious potential to become an oppres-sive superstate. Left and right, openly or implicitly , had this worry on their mind. The future Stalinist faction and its chief did not showmuch sign of sharing such worries. They would discover the price of thisomission some seven or eight years later. For the time being it was pre-cisely the organized forces of the state, and all the levers at its command,that would be launched into operating and managing the new “bigdrive.”
In all those future plans and strategies, the muzhik was again to
become, as so often in the past, the pivotal factor. What to do with him?Was he really the main carrier of an eventual capitalist restoration?Would he support the regime that was trying to overcome a crisis whichthe same muzhik had supposedly created? Would he support the new
accumulation process for which he was to pay a higher price?
In the events that followed, known as the collectivization drive – the
term “collectivization” certainly being a misnomer – a clash of the mainforces on the Russian historical arena could not be averted. The statelaunched an onslaught on the peasantry – a feat of “social engineering”which by far overshadowed Stolypin’s “engineering from above” inscale, daring, and violence. The results were momentous for both thepeasantry and the regime.
Had this clash been the only or simply the main front the process
could have been handled with less damaging results. But the collec-tivization of the peasants was only a part of a larger, rather unplanned“offensive.” Simultaneously with battling the muzhik ’s mentality and
forcing on him new forms of life and labor, the regime launched anGRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 45
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
accelerated industrialization, developed new cities and expanded the old
ones, educated new important layers of professionals indispensable forthe whole process – technicians, scientists, skilled workers, administra-tors – and constantly expanded the state machinery , its bureaucraciesand agencies. The Leviathan was now coming of age, exceeding theworst expectations of earlier critics. There had been similar phenomenain Russian history before, but here all records were probably beaten asfar as the scope of state action and the pervasiveness of terror were con-cerned, as well as the durability of the results. In the process of disci-plining the masses of new workers, of the unwilling peasants in thekolkhozy , in the process of indoctrinating, training, terrorizing, andcoercing, the growing apparaty were themselves submitted to such
strains that much of the medicine they were applying to others wereapplied to them too – including a bloodletting soon to be administeredin such doses that it pointed to pathology in the whole system. This so-called second October produced such a cascade of crises and disequilib-ria that, clearly , the capacity of the regime to act rationally and to copeseemed to have reached its limits. The avalanche of tasks, growing incomplexity , was poured on the shoulders of apparaty , whose numbers
grew but whose abilities could not keep pace with such requirements;in fact, its quality had to fall because of the inﬂux of raw recruits. Allthese factors contributed to the polity veering precipitiously into a frameand system of violence capped by a capricious autocrat.
In the ofﬁcial language of those days the peasantry appeared as the
honorable ally of the working class, and now even a more honorable“kolkhoz peasantry ,” but it also was considered to have been the maincause of all the obstacles the regime found on its way . In this capacitythey were presented as “petit bourgeois,” and no one could remonstratethat this was one and the same mass of peasants, supposedly carriers ofa new socialist essence as well as of the quite opposite spirit that alsokept infecting the working class, ofﬁcialdom, and even the party .
Out of the peasant mass a special stratum of “super- muzhiki ” was
singled out, better known as “kulaks” – yet another of those abuses ofclass analysis of which a long list could be supplied. (See Chapter 5 [ofthe original publication].) The small apex of better-off peasants, who inSoviet conditions were producers still basically relying on the labor ofmembers of their families, with an average of about ten hectares, twoto three cows, two to three horses, one, rarely two or more hired labor-ers – for an average family of eight to ten people. To construct from thema “capitalist class,” or even a “semicapitalist” one, demanded stretchingconcepts well into the realm of the chimerical (although there was noneed to doubt their distaste for the kolkhoz). Yet, as ofﬁcially decreed, itwas with the elimination of these kulaks “as a class,” supposedly the last46 MOSHE LEWIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
rampart of capitalism, that the country ushered in the era of socialism.
So it was not in October when the real thing was eliminated but inStalin’s “big drive,” when a placebo was removed, that socialism cametrue. Was it really socialism that was attained by an ideological mani-pulation of this kind?
The problem can best be visualized by reminding ourselves that,
according to ofﬁcial data, about 400 million rubles’ worth of propertywas conﬁscated from this “rural capitalism.” The ﬁgure was later revisedupward, but the modesty of these sums tell the story . One big industrialplant cost more, but the damage to the economy caused by the expro-priation and elimination of over a million of the best farmers was stag-gering. A trait that was characteristic of much of what was done isworth pointing to: speed and a rush into large-scale units for which thecountryside was not ripe. Nationalization of productive capacity oper-ated prematurely can cause heavy social and political damage; but thereis still a difference between nationalizing a big, bureaucratically orga-nized, industrial corporation, where no more than a change of the boardof directors might be needed, and nationalizing huts, cows, and plows.In this latter case, as we know, the act of the state did actually destroya class of producers, leaving the inheritor with nothing but dust.
This remark applies not only to the expropriation of the kulak but to
the whole collectivization process. The fallacy of collectivization Sovietstyle consisted in imposing on small-scale farmers large-scale forms andmethods before the appropriate technical means and cadres had becomeavailable and without appropriate transitional stages. Most peasantslived and worked in family-run small farms as well as being incorpo-rated, in a particularly Russian way , in a communal landholding system.Over generations they also had acquired a mentality , culture, and ethicsstemming from this mode of life and work and a system of religiousbeliefs, mainly a speciﬁc rural Christianity , heavily tinged with magicalpractices and sorcery . The leap from sorcery to higher mathematics, toput it in terms often used in the 1920s, demanded much more than justthe application of state power. Many thought that communal forms,although age-old and geared to the needs of a primitive and overpopu-lated countryside, could have been used as a steppingstone to somethingmore modern at some later stage. Yet, beﬁtting the impetuosity of theday , this way was discarded. Speeding up by force becoming, for a time,the cure-all, the price tag attached to this approach was constantly thesame: a new and considerable regression in the sphere of agriculture,paralleled by other walks of life, especially the spheres of culture, ideol-ogy , and politics.
We remember that the resistant mentality of the peasant was not
only a problem in running kolkhozy . Thanks to the vast industrial effortGRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 47
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
– we do not forget this major fact – they came to towns in the millions.
The majority of the new industrial working class, many of the ofﬁcials,the student body , and a considerable proportion of the new professionalclasses would be recruited from peasants. They were the material fromwhich the classes of the growing industrial society were constituted.Would they shed their traditional cultural-religious outlook after only ashort period of schooling? And in the environment of the fast growingcities of those 1920s, as well as the building sites and overcrowded laborcamps of the 1930s? A massive feat of social mobility would, in theshort run, produce rather an equally massive disorientation, quite inimical to a quick and serious shedding of old habits. And the phe-nomena of accelerated restructuring we are studying, as well as theireffects, are all “short-run” – and so is our central theme itself. Theimpact of breathtaking social change will be contradictory , and it is onlywith hindsight that the long-term aspects can be separated from theshorter waves of change. Some superﬁcial new veneer that is easy toacquire should not be mistaken for change in deeper cultural and psy-chological layers that take much longer to mature.
As some 17 million peasants settled in cities between 1928 and 1935
alone – not to mention many more millions that came and left the townsduring those years and later – the population of the urban sector wasthereby doubled in this incredibly short time. Obviously , these peoplewere getting or beginning to get “deruralized,” but at the same time, asI have described elsewhere (see Chapter 10 [of the original publication]),they did “ruralize” the towns, especially the factories. Miscalculations inplanning, themselves related to the whipping speedup, were responsiblefor the excessive scope and suddenness of this process. It was thereforenot a simple migration to cities, usually seen as acts of progress andsocial advance. It was to become all very positive, again, “in the longrun.” For the time being, the cities and other places were ﬂooded bystreams of people – many of them desperate because of their dislike ofkolkhozy , or because of dekulakization – that outstripped the power ofabsorption of those cities and strained to the utmost their institutionsand material means. The new arrivals had thus to face a rough andunhospitable environment, a deteriorating economic situation, inade-quate lodging – not to mention the complexities of the Soviet industrialand urban system for which the rural mind was badly equipped.
It all amounted to a massive uprooting, cultural and psychological
shock, causing widespread disorientation, a crisis of values, and theconcomitant phenomena of delinquency , hooliganism, cynicism, massanomie, and the attraction of not too palatable countercultures.
Such phenomena are crucial for the understanding of the 1930s.
Although we deal here, to some extent, with a textbook case of rapid48 MOSHE LEWIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
industrialization and urbanization anywhere, the scale and concentra-
tion in time, as well as the political circumstances, were very differentand unique. The strain and tension imposed on people and on the politi-cal system nationally were immense. At this juncture it was what hap-pened to people that was crucial for the understanding of the polity .People, mostly , as said, of rural origin, had to adapt and somehowrebuild their ethical and cultural values, to regain control of their livesand their sanity . For this purpose all that was available from the past andpresent environments would be used in different doses, the problembeing that not much from the old luggage was of use, whereas the newenvironment too had its capabilities to offer good values greatlyimpaired. The burden of response and solutions was landing in the lapof the state – itself, to say the least, in high fever, strained to the utmost,relying too much on crude coercion and primitive propaganda, and dis-playing quite a basket of pathological syndromes. In the midst of thisschooling and building, training and pushing, the acculturation processwas partly blocked, and a temporary phenomenon for which the term“deculturation” could be suitable set in. This term could account forboth the phenomena of massive uprooting experienced by peasantslosing old values and cultural molds and not acquiring new ones quicklyenough as well as for the results of political and cultural terror andcrude propaganda: drabness; uniformity; sloganeering; crude languageand mores, both below and higher up; foul countercultures; drinkingand criminal behavior.
It is worth repeating that the state operating in this kind of cultural
“void” (of its own making, to a large extent) experienced effects of thosetrends all through its own agencies and apparaty . It was therefore going
to mobilize all it could to master the tides and to go on ruling. This woulddemand quite a lot of doing – and would amount to and account for thelast chapter in the making of the Stalinist state.
One Ideology – or More?
One of the strategies of social control was the creation or the expansion
of a strong scaffolding of bosses, all through the system, callednachal’stvo by the people as well as by the interested parties themselves.
The term came from the political dictionary and practice of tsaristRussia and was going to both prop up as well as actually typify thesystem. But to counter the effects of “deculturation” in towns and ofsimilar phenomena and the loss of incentives in the countryside, a moresubtle policy was needed. The regime had to offer and inculcate values,to extirpate some and instill some other beliefs, and to legitimize its GRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 49
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
policies and its very character in the eyes of the populace, at a time when
it was both socially lifting up and downgrading millions of people.Success would not be easy in this sphere, and it would demand pressuresand compromises on the cultural and ideological fronts and furthertransformations of the character of the polity .
A comparison with the history of the Christian church and of other
great religions in the earlier stages of their development can offer auseful illustration to what was involved in Soviet Russia’s efforts tocombat the effects of “the petit bourgeois tides” and the demoralizingresults of mass anomie and value crisis. “Neither the prophet nor thepriest,” wrote Reinhard Bendix in his book on Max Weber, “can affordto reject all compromise with the traditional beliefs of the masses.”
1The
same goes for regimes, however radical, engaged in the process ofchanging social relations. In its old ﬁght against forms of paganism and,more broadly , against the whole preliterate popular culture, the churchﬁnished by adapting many of its ways to folkways and adopting manyelements from the popular religion in order to win out on substance byconceding some points tactically . Whether these points were just triﬂesor much more is beyond our pursuits here, but the church did use itsmiracles to compete with their magic, its exorcism to outdo their healers,its versions of devils, witches, and sorcerers to eliminate their spirits anddeities. The list of those adaptations and adoptions is much longer, butour concern is with some comparable phenomena in the 1930s in theSoviet Union. Obviously , here was the twentieth century , not the tenth,and things did not occur in centuries but were concentrated in a fewyears. In addition, the acting forces were not heathen peasants versus aChristian church and kingdom but Christian peasants versus an atheis-tic government which was not going to introduce a religion – just usemethods and structures similar to the religious and church experiencefor its own purposes. Still, the analogy is quite striking.
Another parallel with church history , which we will go into only very
brieﬂy , concerns the phenomena of transformation of sects intochurches and the emergence of sects inside established churches, aprocess that was recurrent in all religions. It can throw a searching lighton the transformation of the revolutionary Bolshevik party from anetwork of clandestine committees into a mighty bureaucracy , with apowerful hierarchy on one pole and a rightless “laity” on the other, withprivileges at the top and obligatory catechesis handed from above for theuse of the lower rungs, and ﬁnally with a laicized version of . . . sin,
apostates, and inquisition.50 MOSHE LEWIN
1Reinhard Bendix, Max W eber: An Intellectual Portrait (1960; reprint ed., Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1978), p. 92.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The ﬁrst visible effort undertaken to compete with popular religion
(or the existing religions in general) for the minds of the rural and urbandwellers, on lines that justify our analogy , began initially as a semicon-scious strategy with actions like the erecting of Lenin’s mausoleum andthe encouragement of pilgrimages to Lenin’s embalmed body . All thesedespite the protests and sense of outrage against such practicesexpressed by Lenin’s widow and other old Bolsheviks. Despite also theofﬁcial disdain for the Orthodox church’s practice of venerating relics ofsaints ( moshchi ).
In the 1920s an interesting and lively debate initiated by the 
writer Veresaev in Krasnaya nov ’
2raised the problem of replacing 
religious ceremonies, above all those related to the life-cycle rituals that played such an important role especially in the countryside, bysomething secular and modern, specially conceived for this purpose. Inthe lively debate warnings were sounded against coercive or artiﬁcialmethods, against the cultural and psychological damage that can be caused when depriving people of the old but deeply felt and neededsymbolisms without replacing them by something acceptable to therecipients.
One discussant even cautioned against replacing one authoritarian
and dogmatic set of rituals with another equally authoritarian and dog-matic. The whole operation, in order to make good sense to him, shouldhave consisted only in replacing something authoritarian and conserv-ative by a ceremony that expressed and carried human emancipationonto a higher level – not by another ritual of indoctrination.
3
The warnings expressed in this interesting debate were not heeded.
What was emerging in public life, especially in the 1930s, were cere-monies and a style that looked strikingly as if it had been borrowed fromthe old: processions with “icons” of living and dead leaders, ritualizedpublic ceremonials, pompous displays of a kind of secular liturgy , thegrowing use of a vocabulary soaked with religious and semireligiousovertones. The frontiers of the country became now “sanctiﬁed”(svyashchennye ); government requirements, such as grain procure-
ments, became “commandments” ( zapovedi ) – modest but ever expand-
ing steps into a strategy aimed at replacing the old national and religiousbelief system and ritual by a quasi-cult of a secular state. This was to beobserved in full blossom already during the later 1930s, which also sawthe pinnacle of what can now be seen as the centerpiece of Stalinismand its main achievement: the hectic building of a superstate, heavilyspiced by its so-called excesses.GRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 51
2V . Veresaev , “Ob obryadakh,” Krasnaia nov ’, no. 11 (1926).
3Letter to Veresaev , in ibid.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Not much effort is needed to relate the “Stalin cult” to this broader
strategy of “sanctifying” the state. The Stalin cult became a linchpin inthis revamped secular orthodoxy . Sermons, vows, adulation, and pane-gyrics cotributed a peculiar “Byzantine” ﬂavor to the neo-autocracy . Butbesides being a very serious dent in the ofﬁcial Marxist–Leninist ideol-ogy , which had no place for such developments, the strategy did notseem sufﬁcient or convincing enough in the battle for people’s mindsand for the legitimization of the regime. Marxism–Leninism could notconvincingly explain the new cult, and both were unable or felt unableto make palatable and acceptable the superstate, the rigid bureaucratichierarchy , the bureaucratic takeover of all vestiges of popular sover-eignty , the appearance of privileged strata in society and at the upperechelons of the bureaucratic ladder. Many saw treason in such trends,which were discernible already since the early postrevolutionary days,and in fact, by standards of the ofﬁcial creed and its erstwhile commit-ments, such tendencies were shocking. To mend the ideological fences astrategy of ideological diversion was conceived and applied. First camethe taming of the critical potential of the ofﬁcial creed itself through itstransformation into a strictly controlled catechesis, only as allowed andamended by the “supreme authority .”
An additional prop was then sought in those chapters of the imper-
ial past which best suited the new situation and the self-image of thenew leader: the great tsars, builders and despots, Ivan the Terrible andPeter the Great, seemed to ﬁt the bill. The imperial past was thus tappedfor whatever it could offer in the operation of integrating the peasants,building an industry , and erecting a powerful state, with a despot at itshelm, not unlike those days of yore which offered a glitter of regalia, animperial pomp and an Oprichnina,* with its rake applied against criticsand foes.
The imperial past was screened not only for the uses of quasi-
religious devices to sustain a modern autocracy ( samoderzhavie ), but also
for what it could offer in terms of sustaining nationality ( narodnost ’),
too,
†as well as to mount a brand of great power nationalism complete
with the chant of glory to “Great Russia” ( V elikaya Rus ’), as the Soviet
anthem still says.
There was an obvious craving at the top – which probably ascribed
the same to the masses – for this kind of supportive symbols and ide-52 MOSHE LEWIN
* The Oprichnina was, among other things, the personal and secret police established by
Ivan the Terrible to deal with his enemies, and to administer lands conﬁscated from theboyars for the beneﬁt of the state.
†“ Autocracy , Nationality , Orthodoxy” was the ofﬁcial state motto expressing the ideol-
ogy of tsardom under Nicholas I. One could use the principle of “partyness” to replace“Orthodoxy ,” but there is no need to overdraw the parallel. The similarity is there anyway .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ologies. It was not just a coolly conceived strategy but a deep psycho-
logical need felt by the ruler himself, who might have felt a genuine afﬁn-ity with those great predecessors – and who certainly believed he wasmuch better.
We can see already that more than one ideology was “drafted” to
serve the great restructuring of those years, ideologies that actuallywere incompatible and therefore necessitated additional constructs.
An attentive observer could soon discern the emergence of yet
another ideological production that borrowed elements from theMarxist–Leninist and imperial–national (or nationalist) rhetoric,coupled with some original ingredients – to express the interests andoutlook of the growing bureaucracy . This was to be expected, especiallyat the top of the hierarchy , even if it was not immediately made publicor even not allowed clear and full expression by the shattering purgesthat hit those apparaty and hindered them from settling to rule and enjoy
their privileges unmolested.
Despite the shakiness in its ranks caused by the general ﬂux of the
times and the purges, ofﬁcial ideology could not offer a sufﬁcient expres-sion for what the bureaucracy was doing and was standing for or for its interests as perceived by it. “Statehood” ( gosudarstvennost ’) would
become the central theme which would show what the real goal was andhow to assure the internal cohesion of the carrier of this statehood. Animportant element, though, could be borrowed from the theoreticalfounding fathers, namely , nationalization of the main means of pro-duction as a socialist principle par excellence . It was not that important
that this was not, really , the central tenet of socialism. But it suited theinterest of the bureaucracy to use this formula because it did, in fact,express the source of the state’s power and the position of its servantsas guardians of the national patrimony . This was a good basis for defend-ing their special role and thus special privileges, justifying the growingself-image and self-importance of the new mandarins of the state: theparty apparatchik; the otvetrabotnik ; and the krupnyi gosudarstvennyi
deyatel’ .* This ideology began its career from the defense of the party
apparatus against the onslaught of the opposition in the 1920s, con-tinued through the repudiation of egalitarianism in the early 1930s,blossomed in the imposition and gloriﬁcation of “one-man manage-ment” ( edinonachalie ), and ﬁnally found the right casuistry in the thesis
that the state would whither away sometime in the future, but not beforeits powers had expanded to the utmost during the ongoing historicalGRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 53
* An apparatchik is a paid ofﬁcial of the party , though this is not what they would call
themselves ofﬁcially; probably rather partrabotnik . An otvetrabotnik is an employee of
some rank and responsibility . Krupnyi gosudarstvennyi deyatel ’ – “prominent state leader”
– is a term reserved for top government and party ofﬁcials of ministerial rank and higher.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
stage. The bureaucracy’s sovereignty in the system was thinly camou-
ﬂaged by extolling the importance of leadership and management,which looked like a simple variation on the theme of the party’s leadingrole. The socialist credential of such principles could be questioned, ofcourse, as well as the principle of state ownership of the means of pro-duction. Such ownership, mainly of land, had a precedent in earlierstages of historical development; it could become – and actually was –the basis of all kind of regimes, including the early Moscow princedomand tsardom.
There are some internal, less known, and still unresearched parts of
the bureaucratic ideology which operated already in the 1930s and aregoing stronger today . They concern the justiﬁcation of open and covertmaterial and other privileges, justiﬁcation for their life and career prac-tices, deference to authority and superiors, ideas concerning their posi-tion in the state compared with that of other classes, and other elementsthat are not treated in ofﬁcial handbooks and histories but constitute apotent ideological reality .
It is one of the mysteries of Stalinism that it turned much of the 
fury of its bloody purges against this very real mainstay of the regime.There were among the apparaty , probably , still too many former
members of other parties or of the original Leninist party , too many par-ticipants and victors of the civil war who remembered who had donewhat during those days of glory . Too many thus could feel the right to be considered founders of the regime and base on it part of the claims to a say in decisions and to security in their positions. Probably ,also, letting the new and sprawling administration settle and getencrusted in their chairs and habits could also encourage them to tryand curtail the power of the very top and the personalized ruling styleof the chief of state – and this was probably a real prospect the para-noid leader did not relish. I have already brieﬂy proposed the idea that amodern bureaucracy needs and enjoys “tenure,” which was denied to itin the most cruel ways by the autocrat. In fact, autocracy could notreally block for too long a sociological trend which ﬁnally prevailed inRussia beginning with Khrushchev (see Chapter 11 [of the original publication]).
For the time being, in the midst of a difﬁcult contest with the 
peasantry , the strenuous efforts to discipline labor during the height ofthe purge of the party and the government apparatus, yet another, afourth ideology was put to use. This was felt to be necessary to justifythe existence not only of the superstate but of the speciﬁc meansemployed in erecting it: terrorism and mass repression. This was a dipinto the darker and irrational traditions and urges of individuals andwhole polities, used to glue together an unpalatable reality , an impossi-54 MOSHE LEWIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ble mixture of ideologies and a gruesome and counterrevolutionary
onslaught on people and principles. The device, this time, was worthy ofa great shaman. The show trials epitomized the visible part of this con-struct. It made the mythology of the “enemies of the people” look real,when real people, mostly Lenin’s comrades and leaders of the revolu-tion, actually confessed to the most improbable crimes. The procedurethus seemed to rehabilitate the mythology , when in fact it only provedwhat it tried to conceal. As there was no basis in reality to all the accu-sations, only confession could serve as proof when any analytical orjuridical content was missing. Bukharin, during his own trial in 1938,called this procedure “the medieval principle.” And rightly so, as this“principle” was the basis for the witch trials and the inquisitorial perse-cutions of schismatics.
The parallel with such trials was perfect. The victims were depicted
as sinners who had sold their souls to the devil and committed the basestof treasons. Torture was also used before those trials, but especially mas-sively , with or without any trials, after Stalin personally authorized in1937 the use of “physical pressure” against all those traitors.
In this context it is worth remembering that not just some action –
however innocent – but even a shadow of doubt about the party lineand the leader’s wisdom was already the beginning of treason – becausedoubt was bound to end up serving foreign intelligence services and was thus worthy of being cut down prophylactically , even if it was stillburied somewhere in the subconscious. Condoning somebody’s doubtwithout reporting it to the authorities was equally reprehensible – andpunishable.
All this is fully documented and well known. What is less realized is
that the whole activity , including ferreting out the very function ofdoubt, using scapegoats to whitewash the regime, producing mythicalenemies, belonged to a fourth, independent, and fully operative ideologywhich was offering now to the mass of people, disoriented by the shocksthat were showered on them in those years, both poles of a Manichaeanequation: the forces of progress with the idolized leader at the helm; andthe array of evil forces, spirits or demons, to explain away all that wentwrong or caused suffering, thereby to mobilize the nation around theregime’s work of construction and destruction.
We know that many responded by offering a stream of denuncia-
tions, although we may never know how many did the denouncing or the arresting or how many were arrested or perished. But the efforthere on the part of the regime – or was it mainly caused by the patho-logical mind of the top leader? – was geared to tapping the psy-chological and cultural predispositions of a disoriented population inthe midst of a crisis of values and a cultural no man’s land by makingGRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 55
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
them accept a “demonology” offered by the regime. It also shows how
the system that engaged in a contest with a superstitious folk still believ-ing in the evil force ( nechistaya sila ) could catch the bug itself and 
sink in the deepest superstitions and aberrations which could neither be blamed on any scapegoats nor left at the doorsteps of the popularmentality .
A Social Structure Breeding Authoritarianism
In this chapter we have tried to introduce into the inquiry into the 
Stalinist phenomenon trends that operated in the longer span ofRussian history , the mechanism that undid the previous system but also,and this is our contention, continued to affect the new regime. We havealso considered the results of the revolution and the civil war, which notonly eliminated the previous ruling classes but also brought into the his-torical arena a new social layer to run the state and a new type of aruling institution, the party . Also as a result of those two events thewhole socioeconomic system, and in many ways the political system aswell, reverted to an earlier, precapitalist stage of social development.Therefore this supposedly postcapitalistic system, although recognizingthat its predecessor was not that advanced, was in fact departing froma level of development that had inherited only a fraction of the acquisi-tions of twentieth-century Russia. This state of affairs inﬂuenced therespective positions of “state” and “society ,” the new state being weldedonto and facing, mainly , a socially homogeneous, communautary peas-antry , and the relations between the two might be considered as deﬁn-ing and constraining much of what was possible and what was actuallygoing to happen in the next stages.
At the next crisis – and the gist of the argument is that the whole
context was imbalanced and crisis-prone – a new acceleration createda third complex of factors and trends that closed certain avenues ofdevelopment and strongly favored others and, in conjunction withmany of the props of the previous stages, ﬁnally resulted in the combi-nation of development and terror, a bureaucratic state and an auto-cratic rule that became known as Stalinism. Stalinism, therefore, withits wholesale statization, destruction of cadres, coercive collectivization,concentration camps, and massive slave labor, emerged in a relatively“primitivized” society that had been pushed up by accelerated industri-alization, causing the characteristic twin results of the period: an accul-turation that was marred by considerable deculturation; an industrialleap forward that was seriously hampered by a stagnating agriculture,a massive upward mobility with a no less massive loss of status for many56 MOSHE LEWIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
others, growing literacy , but a general state of immensely downgraded
liberties. In fact, it was going to be, for a generation, a cruelly oppressivepolice state.
Each ﬂoor of the historical structure had contributed to this result.
Tsarist Russia had a growing and dynamic capitalist sector that was tooweak as yet to chew up the peasantry and to transform the system intoa full-ﬂedged capitalist market society . As Lenin saw it, a very advancedmodern industrial and ﬁnancial sector was strongly clogged by a web ofconstraints coming from the state, or from the economic backwardnessof the countryside, where the availability of an enormous surplus ofcheap peasant labor prevented most of the gentry from modernizingtheir estates – and contributed to their loss of substance and of impor-tance in the economy of the country .
The revolution destroyed both sides of the equation: the capitalist
sector, and those relations that constituted the “semifeudal” buildingblocks. But what was it that replaced them? For the time being, it wasto be the results of “two retreating curves,” whereby the new regimeinherited from the past, among other things, a peasantry which was lib-erated from its shackles but had retreated into a mold more “rural” thanbefore and an urban society deprived of many of its experienced andsophisticated layers.
The situation was thus more propitious than before for an enhanced
role of the state and more – not less – authoritarian than before the revolution. The whole social matrix was then breeding just this: autho-ritarianism. It is the context of a “homogenized,” illiterate, and semiliterate society and a “simpliﬁed” social structure, facing a web ofbureaucracies themselves rather heterogeneous socially , with manyholdovers from the previous system, with many new arrivals from thelower classes. The whole government machinery , although itself reﬂect-ing in many ways the social and economic decline, still was capable ofwhat the bulk of society was not: using the tools of the twentiethcentury for ruling and conceiving of their situation and aims in modern,often scholarly terms. All this, as already stated, was conducive toauthoritarian relations between the sides, almost by spontaneous andnatural reﬂex. Studies of the emerging administrations after October, inall spheres of governmental action, including the party , shows it con-vincingly: the tone of command (helped by experiences from the civilwar) and bureaucratic supremacy came to the ofﬁcials, whatever theirsocial origins, naturally and easily . If anything, this trend was going togrow, reaching its apogee in “high Stalinism.” Paradoxically , althoughthe socialist ideology inﬂuenced some to oppose such trends, otherscould see in this same ideology a justiﬁcation for ﬁrm, even tough anddomineering attitudes, beﬁtting those who know what is best for theGRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 57
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
popular classes, who were not privy to concepts on the intricacies of his-
torical development.
How the initiated analyzed the situation – although we do not 
forget that initially they differed quite seriously among themselves – isrelevant to the study of the regime. The leader felt, as we have noted,that the state was given a broader scope and monopolistic position whenfacing the enfeebled social basis. But this situation also created in theleadership of the state, not despite but because of their forward-lookingand modernizing ideology , a sense of vulnerability and, ﬁnally , a para-noid fear of its own masses. Whether this was objectively justiﬁed is aninteresting topic for debate. But it certainly was exaggerated – or tendedto become so – by the habit of using the tools of class analysis conceivedin and for a developed capitalist society . In the social structure after thecivil war, with its leveled-down peasantry and its cities, from whichhigher classes disappeared, the practice of looking desperately for a full-ﬂedged class conﬁguration which did not exist enhanced the sense ofvulnerability , hindered the appearance of more appropriate analyticaltools, and contributed in many ways to the strengthening of factors ofstress and disequilibrium in the system. Misuse of tools of analysis, weclaim, was one of the causes of the loss of self-control and of accruedirrationality that came to plague the country during a long period,ﬁnally driving the system into a state of acute morbidity .
It is difﬁcult to imagine how such social realities, such hard givens 
of the initial stage, would not deeply inﬂuence the further stages. The structural pattern does not predetermine all policies, nor does itdeny certain choices. But it certainly limits those choices and, at least,eliminates certain more desirable alternatives. One does not see a possi-bility of any democratic solutions in those days – even if Lenin wantedone.
4More pertinently , socialist solutions were not available either. 
Ofﬁcially , a transition period was necessary for it, but ﬁnally it was the almost wholesale nationalization that was decreed to be the attributeof socialism. What this meant, in reality , was a statization, which issomething different, although in itself not so unexpected in Russia. But the ideological veil helped here to accelerate a broad nationaliza-tion that was, by any standard, premature in most of the sectors, not58 MOSHE LEWIN
4See Stephen F . Cohen and Robert C. Tucker, eds., The Great Purge Trial (New York:
Grosset & Dunlap, 1965), pp. 653–67. This remark does not aim to explain events andresults in the polity by claiming that consequences ﬂow predictably and unavoidably fromthe described social setting in a rigidly predetermined manner. The broad outlines of theemerging type of polity are, of course, deeply inﬂuenced by this setting, which presentsobvious limiting factors. But inside such a general framework choices and alternativesexist, and much depends on the quality of decisions and on the abilities of the battlingfactions.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
only during the civil war but also later, including in the 1930s. And
“premature nationalization” – an idea which cannot be developed here– is one of the underlying factors of a speciﬁc type of bureaucratizationthat went with the enhancement of state power and rigid controls of thepopulation.
Under these conditions, one wonders whether the failure of the 
Bolsheviks consisted in having relinquished their Octobrist ideals – weare aware how many of them fought against and paid dearly for tryingto slow down the trend away from original hopes – or whether they perished because they did not know how to handle an authoritarianstate and prevent it from veering into something worse, thereby clos-ing avenues for a social democracy in Russia for an era of unknownlength.
The full effects of this kind of failure become clear after a furious
acceleration of economic growth was launched in a society little pre-pared for it all – and precisely because it was so little prepared. The effortto operate a leap in a situation we showed to have been “unbalanced”was the source of deep waves of change and crises, which we have triedto describe. The ensuing additional destabilizations, some of which wereunderlined in our treatment, helped tilt the scale to an ever growingreliance on “administrative methods,” which were, of course, more thanjust coercion. They created an additional temptation to abuse the leversof coercion and prefer them to other tools, a temptation the regime hadno incentives anymore to refuse. If we accept this picture of growingstrains, contradictions, and imbalances in the whole system, whichwere foreshadowed already in the pre-1928 period but expanded in thenext one under the impact of the “big drive,” then further statization,bureaucratization, more coercion, and the making of a quite archaicpersonal despot, can be seen as a response to conditions quite favorablefor these trends. What happens in agriculture should make the emer-gence and deepening of the state’s totalitarian grip and other of its traitsclearer, as this branch – and its carrier, the peasantry – is a key mecha-nism in this process. In another important sphere of life, the cities, thesudden and unplanned inﬂux to towns described as the ruralization ofthe cities, and its consequences for social cohesion, culture, standard ofliving, social and individual psychology , values, collective and personalneuroses, and, ﬁnally , criminality can be seen as facets of a “decultura-tion” that characterized many of the cities. During a number of yearsthe countryside was subjected partly to similar, partly to some speciﬁctransformations. The aim of the shattering collectivization policy wastwofold: to organize the peasants in more productive larger units andforms and thus to help break the country’s dependence on the muzhik .
Raskrest’yanit ’ – “depeasantizing” – was the name of the game. TheGRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 59
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
breaking in of the peasant was the least successful of the policies of the
Soviet state, although polite formulas are misplaced here. What followedwas a creation of a system that was more oriented to and more suc-cessful in squeezing than in producing. The peasantry denied thekolkhoz ﬁelds its zeal, and concentrated it on the tiny family plots. In thisway the muzhik perpetuated himself as a social class of an archaic char-
acter, except that the economic basis for this was only 3.8 percent of thetotal sowing – and on this 3.8 percent, the peasant’s family and thewhole nation depended for their food to a ridiculously high degree wellinto the 1950s. Forceful extraction of unpaid labor, and a residualmethod of payment (payment only at the end of the year, in unpre-dictable quantity , and only after the state, creditors, and the kolkhoztook their share) deeply affected the character of the peasants and madethem remember the NEP with nostalgia. From their point of view, col-lectivization brought them a loss of status and a drop in their standardof living. A whole system of social, economic, and legal restrictionsannulled all they had achieved in three previous revolutions, and theykept asking themselves, as their interest in land and in agriculturebecame atrophied, what their position was in this state, what their socialidentity was. They were not salaried workers (whom the system ofﬁciallyconsidered its mainstay); they were not cooperators (everything wascontrolled and prescribed from above, and elections of kolkhoz ofﬁcialswere just a formality); and they were not the independent producers, thepatrons ( khozyaeva ), as they had been during the NEP . Some kind of
hybrid, some kind of ridiculous mini- muzhik suffering from such a deep
sense of depersonalization and loss of identity – such was one of theresults of this forceful socioengineering. At the same time a situationsomewhat parallel to what occurred in the days of Peter the Greatemerged and lasted well into Khrushchev’s days. Peter tried and had tobuild his industrial plants on the basis of serf labor. Stalin carried on hisindustrialization, especially his industrialization of agriculture, on thebasis of extracting unpaid surpluses, leaving only “residual remunera-tion” to kolkhozniki – which in no way could be a voluntarily accepted
deal. Thus labor-oppressive practices emerged in the countryside and toa lesser extent (and in different forms) in industry as well. A labor-oppressive regimen or numerous elements thereof in the system at largealso enabled and was supplemented by a wide sector of slave labor in thecamps.
This complex of phenomena belongs to the repulsive and regressive
elements in the Soviet industrial and social development. Stalinism wasthe epitome of such traits, and without them it would not have existed.When its main architect passed away and many traits of his system weredismantled, Russia found itself advancing and powerful, but the grip of60 MOSHE LEWIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the initial social backslide of 1917–21, strongly conducive and favor-
able to the authoritarian, ubiquitous state system of the 1930s, has notyet been broken to this day – far from it – and the result has been peri-odic slowdowns, decline, and conservative blockages in the country’sdevelopment and social relations.
Further Reading: The Social History of the Stalin Era
Kendall E. Bailes, Technology and Society under Lenin and Stalin: Origins of the
Soviet Technical Intelligentsia, 1917–1941 (Princeton, 1978).
R. W . Davies, The Industrialization of Soviet Russia 2: The Soviet Collective Farm
1929–1930 (London, 1981).
Donald Filtzer, S oviet W orkers and Stalinist Industrialization: The Formation of
Modern Soviet Production Relations, 1928–1941 (London, 1986).
Sheila Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union, 1921–1934
(New York, 1979).
Sheila Fitzpatrick, “ Ascribing Class: The Construction of Social Identity in Soviet
Russia,” The Journal of Modern History , vol. 65, no. 4 (1993).
David L. Hoffmann, Peasant Metropolis: Social Identities in Moscow, 1929–1941
(Ithaca, 1994).
Hiroaki Kuromiya, Stalin’s Industrial Revolution: Politics and W orkers,
1928–1932 (New York, 1988).
Moshe Lewin, Russian Peasants and Soviet Power: A Study of Collectivization , trans.
Irene Nove (Evanston, 1968).
William G. Rosenberg and Lewis H. Siegelbaums, eds., Social Dimensions of Soviet
Industrialization (Bloomington, 1993).
Lewis H. Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity in the USSR,
1935–1941 (New York, 1988).GRAPPLING WITH STALINISM 61
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Socialist Ideology
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
3
The Soviet Tragedy:
A History of Socialism in Russia
Martin Malia
Excerpted from Martin Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of
Socialism in Russia, 1917–1991 (New Y ork: The Free Press, 1994).
Editor’s Introduction
Another important interpretation of Stalinism sees socialist ideology as
its primary cause.The Cold War itself was in large part an ideological con-frontation between American capitalism and Soviet socialism, so it is notsurprising that historians would emphasize the role of ideology in Soviethistory, including in the origins of Stalinism. This emphasis on ideology didnot go unchallenged, as illustrated by the preceding articles by Suny andLewin, but it nonetheless inﬂuenced historical explanations of Stalinismthroughout much of the Cold War era. With the end of the Cold Warand the collapse of the Soviet Union, one might have expected a de-emphasis on ideology and a turn away from predominantly ideologicalexplanations of Soviet history. In the short run, however, the oppositeoccurred. The collapse of the Soviet Union sparked a wave of Cold Wartriumphalism in which conservative commentators proclaimed victoryover socialism. Some historians also adopted this triumphalist tone, asthey reiterated the centrality of socialist ideology to the Soviet systemand to its failure.
1
The Soviet Union’s collapse also tended to undercut social historians
and revisionists in the Soviet history ﬁeld. Social historians’ approach, withits focus on social classes and movements from below, had been heavilyinformed by Marxism and its belief in the determinacy of socio-economic
1Zbigniew Brzezinski, “The Grand Failure,” and Richard Pipes, “The Fall of the Soviet
Union,” in Lee Edwards, ed., The Collapse of Communism (Stanford, 2000); Robert Con-
quest, “Academe and the Soviet Myth,” in John H. Moore, ed., Legacies of the Collapse of
Marxism (Fairfax, VA, 1994).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
factors. The Soviet collapse spelled the virtual demise of Marxism as a
scholarly as well as a political philosophy, and it thereby hastened the turnaway from social history. Moreover, the rapidity of the Soviet system’s col-lapse weakened revisionists’ claims that social groups had supported theOctober Revolution and the Soviet government. Once Mikhail Gorbachevlifted censorship and coercion, the Soviet people were quick to forsakesocialism, and this seemed to conﬁrm that it never had any popularbacking, and that indeed the Soviet system had been imposed by ideo-logues who illegitimately seized power in 1917.
The fact that by 1991 the “Great Socialist Experiment” had failed, that
the Soviet planned economy had stagnated completely, that peoplerejected socialism altogether, also seemed to indicate that socialist ideol-ogy was unworkable. As such, the conservative view that it was an arti-ﬁcial ideology, imposed forcibly on an unwilling population, gained morecredence. Many Russians themselves were eager to adopt this position,as they dismissed the entire Soviet era as a giant ideological mistake, asa 74-year wrong turn on Russia’s historical path. Such a view neglectedthe fact that the Soviet system had operated for three-quarters of acentury, had industrialized the country (albeit at a tremendous humancost), had educated a largely illiterate population and created a modernurban society, and had transformed the country into a military super-power, capable of defeating Nazi Germany and rivaling the United Statesfor world domination. But in the immediate aftermath of the Soviet col-lapse, the tendency to judge the past through the lens of the present wasoverwhelming, and this perspective lent support to historical explanationsthat emphasized ideology.
In his book, The Soviet Tragedy , Martin Malia provides the most force-
ful statement on the importance of ideology to Stalinism and the Sovietsystem as a whole. Malia begins with a brilliant discussion of the ideas ofsocialism as they developed in Europe and in Russia itself. He conveysboth the intellectual and moral appeal of socialism, and explains the riseof Marxism, which became the leading strain of socialist thought. In theexcerpt that follows, Malia argues for the centrality of socialist ideologyto the Stalinist system. He raises the question of Stalin’s personal inﬂu-ence on the system, and asks whether the criminality of Stalinism was dueto Stalin’s criminal character. But he responds that, while Stalin was indeeda terrible man, Stalinism was not simply the work of one person andinstead comprised an entire system of hyper-bureaucratic and terroristiccontrol.
Malia also considers whether Stalinism should be explained as a legacy
of the tsarist autocracy. Some scholars indeed argue that Stalinist author-itarianism derived from Russian autocratic traditions and from Stalin’s 66 MARTIN MALIA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
conscious emulation of Ivan the T errible and Peter the Great.2But Malia
refutes this explanation as well, pointing out that the admittedly despoticmeasures of these tsars were intended to increase state power and theirown control, and fell far short of the complete social and human trans-formation to which Stalin aspired. Stalin sought not only to modernizeRussia but to create a new world of socialism; his aspiration to transformhumankind came not from the tsars but from socialist ideology.
Malia notes that this belief in Marxian socialism belonged not only to
Stalin, but to the Communist Party as a whole. All Party members endeav-ored to remake society according to their ideological vision. This visionforesaw bloody class warfare with the agents of capitalism, so it was notStalin alone who introduced the massive use of coercion into the system.In fact it was the Party that served as the military–political vehicle thatwaged class war. And it was according to the socialist program of abol-ishing private property and the market that Stalin and the Party conductedtheir “Great Offensive” – the collectivization and industrialization driveslaunched at the end of the 1920s. Hence according to Malia, Stalinism wasnot a deviation from socialism, as revisionists claim, but rather the logicalresult of the Soviet attempt to put socialist ideology into practice.
Malia concludes by asking whether Stalinism was indeed socialism. He
notes that the Soviet system under Stalin clearly achieved non-capitalism;it suppressed the fundamental elements of capitalism – private property,proﬁt, and the market. In this sense Stalinism realized the instrumentalprogram of socialism. At the same time, Stalinism did not impart the sup-posed moral beneﬁts of socialism – material abundance, human freedom,equality, and an end of exploitation. On the contrary, Stalinism impov-erished, imprisoned, and exploited people; by the standards of socialistmorality it was worse than capitalism. Malia accounts for this contradic-tory outcome by arguing that the means and ends of socialism were them-selves in contradiction. By following the socialist program, Stalin and theCommunist Party arrived not at socialist liberation and equality but at atotalitarian dictatorship that repressed civil society and individual auton-omy in the name of socialism.THE SOVIET TRAGEDY 67
2Robert C. T ucker, Stalin in Power:The Revolution from Above, 1928–1941 (New Y ork, 1990);
George Backer, The Deadly Parallel: Stalin and Ivan the Terrible (New Y ork, 1950).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The Soviet Tragedy:
A History of Socialism in Russia
Martin Malia
The Stalin Question
Stalin’s rule during this decisive decade has been called the Second
Russian Revolution, and the designation is quite apt. It has also beencalled “primitive socialist accumulation by the methods of Tamerlane,”
1
and this is even more apt. Yet neither label really conveys the speciﬁcityof the event: The transformation of Russia during the thirties wasunprecedented in scope, to the same degree as the means employed toachieve it were unique in their mixture of the insane and the criminalwith – it must be admitted – the grandiose and the epic.
This poses another major problem of historical interpretation.
2The
previous chapter [in the original publication] argued that the choice ofa coercive road to socialism was no accident but the logical course for a Bolshevik Party in a crisis of survival. Yet it does not automaticallyfollow that the extraordinarily brutal manner in which Stalin imple-mented that choice was equally governed by the Party’s ethos. The paceat which collectivization and industrialization were forced was not theoutcome of an automatic process but the result of conscious decisions.And after 1929 Stalin’s power was so great that he personally made, orat least supervised, the most crucial of those decisions.
So the question of the logic of the system versus Stalin’s personal 
role does not end with the Great Break but continues throughout the thirties, from the collectivization to the Purges. How much of the crimi-nality of the collectivization was due to Stalin’s own criminal character?How much of the madness of the Purge was due to his own possibleinsanity? Surely – this line of inquiry goes – neither Lenin nor Trotsky(both hard Bolsheviks who could quite conceivably have adopted a coer-cive policy in 1929) would have deliberately starved the peasants or mur-dered revolutionary comrades. The personal paranoia and the individualsadism of Stalin the man must constitute the decisive element that madehis reign seem, in Bukharin’s metaphor, like the return of Genghis Khan.
3
1Nikolai Valentinov in Sotsialisticheskii vestnik (New York, April, 1961).
2Robert C. Tucker, Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation (New York: Norton,
1977), pp. 77–108.
3Adam Ulam, Stalin: The Man and His Era (New York, 1973), p. 307.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
To this argumentation is often added the theme that Stalin’s Second
Revolution (unlike the ﬁrst Revolution of 1917) was a revolution fromabove, and revolution from above is the time-honored Russian methodof catching up with the advanced West.
4Thus Stalinism represented a
reversion to the more extreme phases of Russian autocracy , as underIvan the Terrible or Peter the Great. And at a superﬁcial glance thisexplanation seems eminently plausible. Indeed, Stalin himself liked tocompare his rough nation-building with that of these two tsars, Peterfor the Plan and Ivan for the Terror. Yet it would be prudent to reservejudgement on this matter until Stalin’s own record has been examined,and to seek the sources of Stalinism, in the ﬁrst instance, not in remotecenturies but in the actual circumstances that produced the revolutionfrom above. Here, in this line of inquiry , Stalin’s personality is far moregermane than are the ghosts of autocrats past.
Even so, caution is in order on this score, too, for Stalin’s lugubrious
ﬁgure, like Hitler’s equally macabre one, can easily overshadow hisperiod and the system he represented. Thus “Stalinism” in common par-lance too often means a style of rule – an extreme personal tyranny , anexceptional despotism, or a superdictatorship – created and sustained bythe man, Stalin. But these Greek and Roman terms do not do justice, anymore than does the invocation of Genghis Khan, to the historical par-ticularity of the Stalin phenomenon.
So Stalinism must also be viewed as a system of hyperbureaucratic
and terroristic control. Yet even when this is done, the system’s genesisis still too often explained not by structural factors but by the tyrant’soverweening ambition. The consequence of this is that once the evilauthor of the “ism” has disappeared, the system itself may be consid-ered to have ended. Thus in both Western and Soviet usage, as we haveseen, Stalinism was at times held to be a completely different phenome-non from Bolshevism and Leninism.
5In Soviet parlance this assessment
was expressed as “the cult of personality ,” which meant that an other-wise sound socialism was “distorted” by the undue and accidental powerof one leader. So the logics of backwardness, of the monolithic Party , ofprimitive socialist accumulation, and of the ideocratic partocracy wereall obscured by a logic of abstract tyranny , the “cult.”
This approach might be called the “bad man” theory of history . Its
appeal is to simplify a painful past by personalizing it and concentratingTHE SOVIET TRAGEDY 69
4Alexander Gerschenkron, Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective (Cambridge,
Mass., 1962). See also Igor Kliamkin, “Kakaia doroga vedet k khramu,” Novyi mir
(November, 1987), pp. 67–92.
5See introduction [in the original publication].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
it in a single focus of evil.* But, as just noted, the defect of this univer-
sal penchant is that it obscures the deeper system behind the man, or atleast subordinates it to his continuing presence. Thus, what came beforehim and what came after can be viewed as a different system, and thebelief arises that once the focus of evil has disappeared this system can recover a healthy normality . Hence, the “bad man” approach toStalinism is related to the aberration thesis. Indeed, Stalin’s evil person-ality is at the heart of the “aberration” thesis because there is no alter-native way to explain how an otherwise healthy organism went awry .Stalin climbed to dictatorship because he was, as Bukharin liked to see it, “an unprincipled intriguer who subordinates everything to thepreservation of his own power.”
6
Now, Stalin was a bad man, indeed a very bad man, and he grew
steadily worse with age. But much more than this is needed to explainthe momentous policies of his twenty-ﬁve-year reign. He had to have acontext of institutions and ideas within which to work and throughwhich to vent whatever dark drives haunted his psyche. Moreover, wemust assume that there were quite a number of other individuals inRussia and in the Party who had equally harsh childhoods and cruelfathers, who were equally neurotic and thirsty for power, but who didnot become politically signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Psychology does not trans-late into politics unless there is ﬁrst a political problem to be met. Inexplaining any political leader’s policies we must accept, just as he does when he acts, the primacy of political motivation. Political leaderswho use their power simply to act out their psychoses do not keep power very long, as the cases of Peter III, or Paul I, and on back toEmperor Commodus, serve to illustrate. But Stalin lasted a quarter of acentury , and by any mundane standards of judgement he must be con-sidered a world-historical success: After all, he built socialism, defeatedfascism, and created a Soviet empire. Psychological reductionism inhistory works no better than socioeconomic reductionism. One of thepurposes of this chapter, therefore, is to derive Stalin’s policies from the Soviet system rather than to work the relationship the other wayaround. . . .70 MARTIN MALIA
* The personalization of history is not conﬁned to negative phenomena. There is also 
a “good man” view of history , of which a striking example was the Western cult ofGorbachev , which for six years sustained the illusion that Communism was reformingitself when in fact it was collapsing. Indeed, personalization of public life is well-nigh universal – from Romulus to George Washington – because it seems to make reality easilycomprehensible to everybody .
6Stephen F . Cohen, Bukharin and The Bolshevik Revolution: A Political Biography,
1888–1938 (New York, 1973), p. 322.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
These considerations now make it possible to address the questions of
interpretation posed at the beginning of this chapter. First there is thematter of autocratic continuity and periodic revolution from above inRussian history . The phenomenon, of course, is undeniable; but the realproblem is how we explain it, and how we relate one episode of revolu-tion to another. And on this score analogy is too often confused withcause, as if some metaphysical essence were operating from Ivan toPeter to Stalin.
7Nor does Stalin’s own penchant for this type of think-
ing prove much. His self-comparisons with Peter and Ivan served to illus-trate and justify what he had already decided to do for other reasons;they were hardly his inspiration when he set out to do it. At that pointhis ideological references were Marxism and socialism and, especially ,Lenin the Leader.
Thus it is very easy to establish empirically the sources of Stalin’s poli-
cies in the Bolshevik tradition; but it is extremely difﬁcult, if not impos-sible, to ﬁnd empirical transmission belts leading to those policies fromIvan or Peter. The most that one can say in support of a traditionalRussian input into Stalinism is that roughly analogous situations ofbackwardness produced roughly analogous responses. But this is a farcry from saying that the earlier responses caused the later one, or thatthe later response in some mysterious manner reincarnated the earlierones. The nature of Russia’s industrial backwardness in the 1930s is asdifferent from that of her military backwardness in the eighteenth orthe sixteenth century as are the politics of ideocratic partocracy fromthose of divine-right absolutism.
Moreover, the intensiﬁcation of autocracy has hardly been the only
theme in Russian history . In particular, from Peter’s time to 1917 Russiawas moving steadily in the opposite direction, towards a more plural-istic and “European” order. The process of the “unbinding” ( raskre-
poshchenie ) of the Russian universal service order proceeded from the
gentry’s emancipation from compulsory state service in 1762 to thepeasant’s emancipation from serfdom in 1861, and from local self-government through the zemstvos and a largely independent judiciary
in 1864 to the legislative Duma of 1905 – in short, to the creation of acivil society .
Furthermore, if we move from loose analogies to a closer look at
actual comparisons, it should be clear that revolution from above onStalin’s titanic scale has no precedent in Russia, or anywhere else forthat matter. Both Ivan the Terrible and Peter the Great worked with aTHE SOVIET TRAGEDY 71
7Alexander Yanov , The Origins of Autocracy: Ivan the Terrible in Russian History (Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1981).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
universal service state.8A country with no natural frontiers, with a poor
agricultural base, and with only a minuscule urban population was constrained to general mobilization of both its material and humanresources in order to survive as an independent entity , and later in orderto expand. This meant that the peasants were enserfed to the gentry inorder to permit the latter to serve in the armies of the autocratic tsar,while the gentry’s possession of its lands and serfs was conditional onthat same service. Russia’s was the harshest system of universal serviceanywhere in Europe, though it was not without partial parallels fartherWest, particularly in Prussia.
Peter the Great tightened the requirements of state service for all
social classes, from the gentry to the serfs, in order to give Russia for theﬁrst time a standing army on the Western model. But he did not sub-stantially alter the basic structure of the system; rather, he gave the formof a European ancien régime to the already existing Muscovite servicestate. He could do this because the difference between the militarizedsystems of Russian autocracy and of Western absolutism was not allthat great at the time. But he in no way replaced the old Russian orderwith a new one of his own devising. The revolutionary aspect of his rule lay in cultural Westernization rather than in social and politicalreorganization.
Ivan the Terrible’s policies, to be sure, were more socially destructive
than Peter’s. The old hereditary boyar aristocracy was effectively brokenas a cohesive group and replaced by the service gentry; Ivan’s “politicalpolice,” the oprichnina , acquired a separate territorial realm-within-a-
realm where autocratic caprice was the supreme law; and the wholeMuscovite system was put under such strain that soon after Ivan’s death it collapsed in the great smuta of 1605–13. Although we can
surmise that Ivan’s policies were due to the pressure of the unsuccess-ful Livonian war with Poland and Sweden, we do not really know hismotives; but it is not very likely that they add up to a “modernizing” res-ponse to the European challenge, as was clearly the case with Peter’s.The ultimate result of Ivan’s policies, moreover, was not revolution-ary , for the Muscovite order restored by the Romanovs after the smuta
was fundamentally the same as that which had existed before Ivan.
Stalin’s revolution from above, in contrast, cannot be situated in any
continuum with the social order that preceded it, whether under theNEP or the Old Regime. But just as important is the radical ideologicalenvelope of Stalinism: in reality it is ideology that explains both the totalscope and the inordinate cost of Stalin’s revolution. Peter and Ivan, onthe other hand, in their justiﬁcations of autocracy , used only the most72 MARTIN MALIA
8See chapter 2 [of the original publication].
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
conventional arguments of the European tradition: either the Christian
duty of submission to divinely ordained power or the imperatives ofnatural law . Thus, even though Stalin, like Peter (though not like Ivan),was responding to the pressures of economic backwardness and mili-tary lag, his overall ambition to bring history to its culmination with thenew world of socialism is quite incommensurate with his predecessor’slimited, purely national projects.
Similarly , a secondary role must be assigned to Stalin’s personality in
explaining his system. Before 1929 the worst that could be said abouthis character was what Lenin had said – that Stalin was “too rude” for state responsibilities – though Lenin deemed such rudeness quiteacceptable among Bolsheviks. To be sure, the overall record of Stalin’scareer shows him to be cruel to the point of sadism, and suspicious tothe point of paranoia. Still, this was not apparent at the start of his GreatOffensive. It is thus best to assume that his character was not a constant,but that it evolved under the pressure of the unprecedented risks of theOffensive.
In 1932, in the midst of that Offensive, Stalin’s wife committed
suicide after a violent argument that apparently concerned his policiestoward the peasants. Even though he was hardly a sensitive man, thismust have produced some effect on him, and for the worse. And thecarnage of the collectivization no doubt hardened him even more. Later,he told Winston Churchill that the ordeal had been as frightful as thewar.
9 We may also assume that for one so deep in crime as was Stalin by
the time of the terror famine, any further crime could only come moreeasily . As with a drug, ever larger doses of crime could only produce a lesser effect, and murder could degenerate into mere habit. Thus,although Stalin’s criminality did not simply derive from his character,his criminal character may have increasingly derived from his crimes.
But more important than history or psychology is the institutional
setting in which Stalin operated, a setting that bred both cruelty andparanoia. The Party , as its agitprop ceaselessly proclaimed, was in a classwar to the death. It was surrounded by enemies without and within:international capital, petty bourgeois kulaks, bourgeois wreckers, anddeviationists within the Party . Stalin no doubt personally aggravatedthis mood of universal struggle and suspicion, but he by no meanscreated it; it derived, rather, from the Party’s whole heritage. This was aParty with which his “rude” character meshed only too readily .
To discover the impetus behind the Great Break, therefore, we must
return to what had been the driving force of Communism since it ﬁrstTHE SOVIET TRAGEDY 73
9Ulam, Stalin , p. 290.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
discovered its vocation in the militant and military frenzy of 1918. What
fueled Bolshevism’s Second Offensive was what had fueled the ﬁrst: thevocation of the Party itself as the military–political vehicle for bringinghumanity into socialism. The Party had no other reason for existing. By1929, after twelve years of vainly waiting for socialism to appear, thetime had come to force the hand of history and to build the future by anact of will. The alternative was not Bukharin’s “growing into socialism”;the alternative was the withering away of the Party’s ideologicalmomentum in an interminable effort to wait out the muzhik. And withthe dissipation of ideology , the Party’s will to monopolize power wouldhave eroded as well.
So the second episode of War Communism was launched, but it
unfolded with a much greater sweep and intensity than the ﬁrst. Andthe tone of the operation was quite different: Whereas 1918 had seen ahot hysteria, unpremeditated and unrehearsed, 1930 saw a colder hys-teria, prepared and channeled to a high degree. This was because thetasks to be accomplished in 1930 were more complicated than those in1918, and the Party-army was now more numerous, disciplined, andstronger. Let us recall the sequence of causation leading to this SecondOffensive.
The Revolution and War Communism made Russia much more back-
ward than she had been before 1917. Thus, when the market wasreborn after 1921, the peasants became the arbiters of the country’seconomic destiny . By 1926 the regime had no choice but to increaseinvestment in industry , if only to renovate an obsolete and decayingplant; but the Party at the same time wished to build socialism to giveitself a worker and urban “base.” Yet the Party’s ideological distrust ofboth the market and kulak “capitalism” led it to set prices too low to keepthe peasants producing. Thus in 1927 foodstuffs became scarce in thecities just as industrial expansion was taking off. The solution of raisingstate prices and relying on the market for the rest was rejected, since this would have made the Party and its industrial program hostage to uncontrollable, “anarchic,” and “capitalist” forces. Therefore, it wasdecided to take the peasants’ grain by coercion through immediate andfull collectivization. Once this choice had been made, it also became nec-essary to accelerate industrial expansion to the maximum. And thesetwo decisions together meant suppressing the market as well as all socialclasses that lived off it, from the kulaks to the nepmen.
But this amounted to a total “solution” to all problems at once
through the total subordination of the whole of society to the Party-state. Thus one step inexorably led to another, all the way to the creationof a new, totalitarian order. There is no overall logic of Russian history74 MARTIN MALIA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
leading to this result; but there issuch a logic of Bolshevism – realizable
should circumstances permit the Party to act out fully its Marxistfantasy . In 1918–21 the circumstances of economic breakdown cut theprocess of Bolshevik self-realization short. In 1929–1933 the circum-stances of a stronger Party and an economy in reasonable health (atleast at the start) permitted the Party to take the Marxist logic to its resolution.
This does not mean, however, that the Party consciously desired or
even anticipated what it found when it reached that culmination.Instead, as in 1918, it improvised its way into discovering what its trueprogram was. Soviet socialism was built not out of any genuine plan butas if driven by Hegel’s “cunning of reason” – that is, the outcome of theOffensive was determined by the logic of the system itself, a logic leadingthe Party in ways not fully apparent to its leaders. Thus Stalin and his men moved by a process of trial and error, and from one crisis to another, to arrive at the unproductive kolkhoz system and the military–industrial complex they had created by 1935. And when theygot there, of course, they had no choice but to proclaim that these werethe “socialist” results they had aimed at all along.
In fact, for a time they were not sure they would reach this “socialism”
at all. Stalin knew at the start that his Offensive was a high-risk gamblethat put the survival of the system at stake. To be sure, Lenin hadgambled everything in October and again at Brest-Litovsk, but at thattime there was much less to lose than in 1929 when a Soviet stateexisted. And, indeed, by 1931–2 it looked as though Stalin would losehis gamble, for the early blunders in both agriculture and industry hadthrown the country into such chaos that it seemed, once again, as if thewhole system might collapse. It was only in 1933, after the fall harvesthad been brought in and such industrial projects as Magnitogorsk hadat last begun producing, that Stalin won his gamble. It was only inJanuary 1934, at the Seventeenth Party Congress, that the Party coulddraw its ﬁrst conﬁdent breath since January 1930 and proclaim the“victory” of its Offensive.
Thus another crisis of survival was surmounted. And it was sur-
mounted because, at the height of the danger, the Party in a visceralreﬂex had closed ranks behind the Leader. Preobrazhenskii and most ofhis colleagues on the Left rallied to Stalin because he was implementing,however crudely , their platform, and because they could not bear to beleft out of the building of socialism. One of them, Iurii Piatakov , not onlybecame Sergo Ordzhonikidze’s deputy but was indeed the real brainsbehind the industrialization drive. Bukharin and most of the Right,despite their declared commitment to the peasant and the market, didTHE SOVIET TRAGEDY 75
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the same because they too could not bear being left out of the Great
Offensive, no matter how botched its execution and how uncouth itsleader. It is noteworthy that not one prominent Bolshevik resigned fromthe Party or publicly protested its crimes. Only Trotsky , who by now hadbeen expelled from the country , openly campaigned against Stalin’s“mistakes” – but as distortions of his, Trotsky’s, correct policies.
Yet what really brought the Party through the crisis were not these
holdovers but the likes of Nikita Khrushchev and their simpler faith. In 1928, during the Shakhty affair, Khrushchev was active against“wreckers” in his home region of the Donbas; shortly thereafter hemoved to Kiev to become head of the Organization Department of theUkrainian Party . In 1929 an Industrial Academy (in effect, a school foradult education) opened in Moscow to train Party cadres of working-class background to assume responsibilities in the now revolutionaryeconomy , and Khrushchev became one of its ﬁrst students. There heparticipated in expelling a group of fellow students as “Right deviation-ists.” In 1931, on the recommendation of the former General Secretaryof the Ukrainian Party , Kaganovich, he became a Party district secre-tary in Moscow and helped clean out the supporters of his Rightist pre-decessor, Riutin (of whom more shortly).
In 1934, at the age of 39, Khrushchev was rewarded by election to
the Central Committee at the Congress of Victors. Soon thereafter hesucceeded Kaganovich (who had been promoted to higher things) asMoscow Party chief and thus took over supervision of the constructionof the Moscow Metro. It is upwardly mobile worker-peasants turnedParty-workers like Khrushchev that Stalin called the “salt of the earth.”Like the Leader himself, they could quite sincerely see themselves as theproletariat in power; and they could feel just as sincerely that they hadan inherent right to exercise their class dictatorship for the building ofsocialism and the betterment of all mankind.
***
But was the result of their efforts really “socialism?” It was clearly not
“capitalism;” but is that enough to qualify it as true “socialism?” Social-ist opinion outside Russian was divided over this question at the time,and it has bedeviled all discussion of socialism ever since. With Stalin’sachievement the discourse of world socialism entered a wholly newphase.
From the 1830s to the First Five-Year Plan, socialism was a state that
lay in the future; with Stalin’s victory for the ﬁrst time it could be allegedthat socialism actually existed in the present. It had passed from the76 MARTIN MALIA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
status of a prospective utopia to that of a palpable reality , and from the
status of a movement to a society . Or at least the Soviet regime claimedthat this had occurred. From that time onward, therefore, any socialisthad to deﬁne his position in terms not just of the Soviet “experiment”but of the Soviet “achievement.” But what are the criteria for decidingSoviet socialism’s ontological status?
The Soviet Union had indubitably arrived at noncapitalism. It had
suppressed private property , proﬁt, and the market, and this is clearlythe instrumental program of integral socialism. But most of the positivemoral beneﬁts that were supposed to result from this program had notappeared; on the contrary , a large number of unanticipated negativeconsequences could be observed. There was no growth of materialabundance, but rather an increase of penury . There was no advance ofhuman freedom, but instead a regression into servitude. There was notriumph of equality , but rather a new stratiﬁcation of the population asa function of the Party’s purposes. There was no end of the exploitationof man by man; indeed, to this was added the exploitation of everybodyby the Party-state.
In short, the Party had built socialism, and it turned out not to be
socialism. Or, to be more precise, the Party had realized the instrumen-tal program of socialism, but socialism’s moral program still remainedin the future. Indeed, the new present was arguably worse, in terms ofsocialist morality , than the old capitalist past.
There are several ways of coping with this unexpectedly contra-
dictory outcome. One is to deny that any contradiction existed at all, and to claim that the moral consequences of socialism did in realityfollow from the practical program. This is the course that was adoptedby the Soviet regime, and it is difﬁcult to see how it could have done otherwise without admitting that it had failed and that the system wasa fraud.
Another solution is to say that the central objective of the Soviet Rev-
olution was realization of the instrumental program of non-capitalism– namely , the end of private property – and that since this had beenachieved, the Soviet order was a real, if incomplete, socialism. This is thecourse taken by Trotsky , Bukharin, and a multitude of later commen-tators, both in Russia and abroad, from Roy Medvedev and Gorbachevto any number of Western authorities. This solution, of course, em-braces the already mentioned aberration thesis; the bad-man theory ofhistory; and/or the heavy heritage of Russian autocracy , bureaucracy ,and backwardness. And until 1991 it entailed the belief that in the fullness of time the moral program of socialism would be added to theinstrumental one. It is this hopeful and consoling via media that has THE SOVIET TRAGEDY 77
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
been far and away the most popular solution to the Soviet conundrum,
both in the East and in the West.
But there is a third solution, which is to say that the instrumental
program of socialism leads quite logically to the perversion of its moralprogram. In other words, the failure of integral socialism stems not fromits having been tried out ﬁrst in the wrong place, Russia, but from thesocialist idea per se. And the reason for this failure is that socialism as full noncapitalism is intrinsically impossible. For the suppression ofprivate property , proﬁt, and the market is tantamount to the suppres-sion of civil society and all individual autonomy . And although this canbe approximated for a time, it requires an inordinate application of forcethat cannot be sustained indeﬁnitely .
As a practical matter, therefore, socialism leads not to an assault on
the speciﬁc abuses of “capitalism” but to an assault on reality tout court .
It becomes, in effect, an effort to suppress the real world, and this issomething that cannot succeed in the long run. But for a protractedperiod this effort cansucceed in creating a surreal world, one deﬁned by
the paradox that inefﬁciency , poverty , and brutality can be ofﬁcially pre-sented as the summum bonum of society , and one where society is unable
to challenge this fraud.
It is this resolution of the Soviet conundrum that East European dis-
sidents adopted when they were ﬁrst able to speak up after Stalin’s death.And it is on this solution that the majority of the people of EasternEurope acted in 1989–91 when they concluded that the system couldnot be reformed but had to be abolished, and that the basic social reali-ties of private property , proﬁt, and the market had to be restored ifever the East was to make an exit from the failed surreality of “really-existing” socialism.
But it would take a half-century for all of this to become clear. In the
meantime the regime’s greatest successes were still before it. In 1934–5Stalin gave his country a new breathing spell, a mini-NEP – but only inthe psychological sphere. With a second and more sober Five-Year Planunder way , rationing could now come to an end. The Leader thereforeproclaimed in a new slogan that “life has become better, life has becomemore joyous.” But this was only a respite before he moved to completehis work through the Great Purges.
Further Reading: Marxist Ideology and Stalinism
Giuseppe Boffa, “The Role of Ideology ,” in Robert V . Daniels, ed., The Stalin Revolution , 3rd
edn. (Lexington, Mass., 1990).78 MARTIN MALIA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Leszek Kolakowski, “Marxist Roots of Stalinism,” in Robert C. Tucker, ed., Stalinism:
Essays in Historical Interpretation (New York, 1977).
Wolfgang Leonhardt, Three Faces of Marxism (New York, 1974).
Alfred G. Meyer, Communism , 4th edn. (New York, 1984).
Robert C. Tucker, ed., The Marx–Engels Reader (New York, 1972).
Robert C. Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind: Studies in Stalinism and Post-Stalin Change (New
York, 1963).THE SOVIET TRAGEDY 79
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The Foreign Threat
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
4
The Objectives of the Great
T error, 1937–1938
Oleg Khlevnyuk
Originally appeared as Oleg Khlevnyuk, “The Objectives of the
Great T error, 1937–1938,” in Julian Cooper, Maureen Perrie, andE. A. Rees, Soviet History ,1917–1953: Essays in Honour of R.W.
Davies (London: Macmillan Press, 1995).
Editor’s Introduction
The aspect of Stalinism that has attracted more attention than any other
is the Great T error – one of the most deadly and bizarre episodes in allhuman history. In the late 1930s, millions of innocent people, includingmany high ranking Communist Party members, were imprisoned or shotby the Soviet secret police. The Great T error is the term given to thismassive use of state violence which included both the Great Purges ofParty members and wide-ranging arrests and executions of average Sovietcitizens. Many historians have sought to explain why the terror took place.While no one denies Stalin’s involvement in the terror, scholars attributevarying degrees of responsibility to him. Some scholars believe that Stalinmasterminded all aspects of the terror and was personally responsible forthe murder of millions of people. Other scholars, while not exoneratingStalin, stress systemic or political factors that caused or at least fueledthe terror.
The totalitarian model presented terror as an integral part of the Soviet
system. One totalitarian theorist even postulated that purging was a per-manent and necessary component of Soviet totalitarianism – a hypothe-sis proven wrong when bloody purges ceased after Stalin’s death.
1Radical
revisionists have also looked beyond Stalin to explain why the Great T error
1Zbigniew Brzezinski, The Permanent Purge:Politics in Soviet Totalitarianism (Cambridge, Mass.,
1956). Some historians of the totalitarian school nonetheless stress Stalin’s role; see RobertConquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment (New Y ork, 1990).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
occurred. J. Arch Getty, for example, argues that the Great Purges were
not a planned, coherent policy controlled by Stalin, but rather an extremeform of political inﬁghting within the Party. What began as an attempt by Stalin and other leaders to consolidate control over local Party organizations spun out of control after rank-and-ﬁle Communists wereencouraged to denounce their local bosses and Party members began to settle scores with one another. Getty and another revisionist, GaborRittersporn, also stress the extreme social tensions within the countryand widespread fear of conspiracies and foreign spies to explain how the purges turned deadly.
2
Oleg Khlevnyuk’s pioneering research in the former Communist Party
archives has shed a great deal of light on Stalin’s use of terror. In the fol-lowing selection, Khlevnyuk cites previously classiﬁed documents of thePolitburo (the Communist Party’s supreme council) to argue that theGreat T error was clearly orchestrated from the top. The Politburo in factsent quotas for arrests and executions to the NKVD (the Soviet secretpolice), which carried out the terror. These quotas were directed at speciﬁc groups within the population – expelled Party members, formeropposition party members, certain national minorities, former kulaks,criminals, and other “anti-Soviet elements.” Both the Great Purges withinthe Party and the Great T error overall, then, were centrally controlledefforts to eliminate purported enemies of the ruling Politburo. Khlevnyukacknowledges that local authorities in some cases over-fulﬁlled theirquotas, but he maintains that it would be wrong to attribute the terrorto local initiative, given that the Politburo ceaselessly demanded increased“struggle with the enemy.”
In addition to demonstrating that the terror was controlled from the
center, Khlevnyuk presents evidence that it was directed by Stalin himself.Stalin was the author of many of the Politburo directives on the terror,and he personally approved lists of individuals and groups to be arrestedand executed. Khlevnyuk also assesses Stalin’s objectives in carrying outthe Great T error. While not dismissing the possibility that Stalin’s paranoiaor vindictiveness contributed to the terror, Khlevnyuk makes the case thatStalin launched the terror to eliminate any potential opposition in theevent of war. By examining the particular groups targeted by the terror,he concludes that Stalin and his inner circle sought to remove all strataof the population that were hostile or potentially hostile to them. Stalin84 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
2J. Arch Getty, Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party Reconsidered,
1933–1938 (New Y ork, 1985); Gabor T. Rittersporn, Stalinist Simpliﬁcations and Soviet Com-
plications: Social Tensions and Political Conﬂicts in the U.S.S.R., 1933–1953 (Chur, NY, 1991);
and “The Omnipresent Conspiracy: On Soviet Imagery of Politics and Social Relations inthe 1930s,” in Nick Lampert and Rittersporn, eds., Stalinism: Its Nature and Aftermath: Essays
in Honour of Moshe Lewin (Armonk, NY, 1991).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
considered these targeted groups a potential “ﬁfth column” of internal
opposition in the event of war with a foreign country.Viacheslav Molotov,one of Stalin’s closest supporters within the Politburo, made this veryargument late in his life when he recalled the Great T error; he maintainedthat it was absolutely necessary to eliminate anyone who could not be counted on to support the Soviet government, especially given thegrowing threat of fascism and likelihood of war.
Ever since the October Revolution in 1917, the foreign threat had
loomed large in the minds of Communist leaders. During the Civil Warwhich followed the Revolution, several foreign countries, including theUnited States, Britain, France and Japan, had sent troops to intervene onthe side of anti-Communist forces. This foreign intervention conﬁrmedthe Communists’ fears that the capitalist countries were eager to over-throw and eliminate the ﬂedgling Soviet state. Throughout the 1920s and1930s, the threat posed by “capitalist encirclement” weighed on Com-munist leaders, including Stalin himself who continually warned of bothinternal and external enemies. This threat became much more concretewith the rising international tensions of the late 1930s. Hitler, who cameto power in Germany in 1933, made no secret of the fact that he plannedmilitary aggression to expand eastward. His military build-up and bel-ligerent moves in the second half of the 1930s made this threat moreimminent. At the same time, Japan was engaged in its own military aggres-sion in Manchuria and increasingly threatened Soviet territory as well.
At the time of the Great T error, then, the foreign threat and likelihood
of war were very tangible to Communist leaders. They could not help but think of the possible consequences for themselves in the event of war. Khlevnyuk cites the classic Stalin biography by Isaac Deutscher, whoimagines a conversation between Stalin and the ghost of Nicholas II, theRussian tsar overthrown by the 1917 Revolution.
3The Revolution had
been precipitated by the horrendous military losses suffered by the tsaristarmy during the First World War. Military defeats had discredited the tsarand emboldened his opponents, among them the Bolsheviks (Commu-nists) who ultimately came to power and who executed the tsar and his family during the Civil War. In the event of another great war, Stalintoo had to worry about internal challenges to his leadership. Eliminatingpotential opponents within the Party and the population as a whole servedas a preemptive strike against any such opposition.
Khlevnyuk is not seeking to justify the use of terror through his expla-
nation of Stalin’s motives. By killing millions of people, including many high-ranking Party ofﬁcials and army ofﬁcers, Stalin greatly weakened thecountry on the eve of the Second World War, and hence undermined theTHE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 85
3Isaac Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography , 2nd edn. (New Y ork, 1966).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ability of his regime to withstand the Nazi invasion. Nonetheless, the
foreign threat in the late 1930s was genuine, and it provided an impetusfor dealing with internal enemies, real or imagined. That Stalin chose theGreat T error as his method for dealing with enemies remains a matter forhistorical and moral judgment. But Khlevnyuk makes a strong case thatStalin’s motives for using terror went beyond any personal vendettas orparanoia.
It is possible to see the foreign threat as a cause for all of Stalinism,
not just the Great T error. Given Russia’s crushing defeat in the First WorldWar, and the extreme international tensions of the interwar period, somescholars have argued that Stalinism was necessary to prepare the countrymilitarily. At the time of the First World War, Russia was far less indus-trialized than western European countries, Germany in particular, and itsweaknesses in industry and transportation contributed greatly to its mil-itary defeats. Following the Revolution, all Communist leaders and manynon-Communist engineers and technical specialists agreed that the SovietUnion needed to industrialize quickly. The precise pace of industrializa-tion and the means by which to achieve it remained topics of debate, butwhen Stalin launched his highly coercive collectivization and industrializa-tion campaigns at the end of the 1920s, he received the support of mostParty members. One historian,Theodore von Laue, has in fact argued thatStalinism was a logical if horriﬁc response to the intense foreign threat ofthe interwar period and the need to industrialize at any cost.
4
As with the Great T error, the causes of Stalin’s forced collectivization
and industrialization drives remain important topics for historians todiscuss. T o point out the foreign threat does not necessarily negate theimportance of Communist ideology or Stalin’s personal predilections. Still,it is important to consider the foreign threat as one factor that, either byitself or in conjunction with other factors, caused Stalinism. Khlevnyuk’spioneering research on the Great T error provides important evidence formaking this historical judgment.86 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
4Theodore von Laue, Why Lenin? Why Stalin? Why Gorbachev?:The Rise and Fall of the Soviet
System (New Y ork, 1993); von Laue, “Stalin in Focus,” Slavic Review , vol. 42, no. 3 (1983).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The Objectives of the Great T error,
1937–1938
Oleg Khlevnyuk
The mass repression in the Soviet Union in 1937–8, variously referred
to as the Great Terror or the ‘Ezhovshchina’, has produced a volume ofmonographs, articles and memoirs, which have examined the pheno-mena from a diversity of viewpoints.
1However, many of the circum-
stances surrounding this tragedy remain obscure. In particular there is little information concerning the mechanism whereby the repres-sion was organised and carried out. Most of the NKVD’s documents for this period remain in the KGB’s archives and are not available forresearchers. In the still closed Presidential archives there is a largevolume of material concerning the activities of the Politburo and Stalin in 1937–8. In republican, provincial and local archives there is awealth of material on how central directives were implemented in thelocalities.
The detailed study of these problems will require much time and
effort by historians. That work has only just started. The lack of infor-mation and insufﬁcient research mean that many questions cannot yetbe fully answered. Some of the most intriguing questions concern therelationship between centralism and ‘local initiative’ in the events of1937–8. More work is needed to determine the system whereby thevictims of repression were selected, the objectives of the purgers, as wellas the question of the actual number of the victims who were repressed.
In the present article, which draws on new documents including
those from the Politburo’s special ﬁles ( osobye papki ), an attempt is made
to present in general outline the mechanism of repression in 1937–8,and on this basis to determine what were the objectives of the orga-nisers of the terror.
Almost all historians are agreed in ﬁxing the commencement of the
new stage of Stalinist repression at the end of the summer–beginning
This chapter was originally translated by E. A. Rees.
1See for example R. A. Medvedev , Let History Judge: The Origins and Consequences of
Stalinism (New York, 1971); R. Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment (New York,
1990); J. A. Getty , The Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party 
Reconsidered, 1933–1938 (New York, 1985); G. T . Rittersporn, Stalinist Simpliﬁcations and
Soviet Complications: Social Tensions and Political Conﬂicts in the USSR, 1933–1953(Philadelphia, 1991); J. A. Getty and R. T . Manning (eds), Stalinist Terror: New Perspec-
tives (Cambridge, 1993).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
of the autumn of 1936. In June Stalin instructed the NKVD to organ-
ise a new political trial of Trotskyists and Zinovievists.2On 29 June the
Central Committee of the CPSU dispatched to the localities a secret letterconcerning ‘the terrorist activities of the Trotskyist–Zinovievist coun-terrevolutionary bloc’,
3on the basis of which many former opposition-
ists were repressed. In August in Moscow there took place the trial of theso-called ‘anti-Soviet joint Trotskyist–Zinovievist centre’. All 16 of theaccused, including L. B. Kamenev and G. E. Zinoviev , were shot. In the country there followed a wave of new arrests.
On 26 September on Stalin’s insistence the Politburo removed G. G.
Yagoda from the post of People’s Commissar of Internal Affairs (NKVDUSSR) and appointed in his place N. I. Ezhov , who for several years, atStalin’s behest, had exercised a supervisory role over the NKVD. On 29September Stalin signed the Politburo decree, ‘Concerning the counter-revolutionary Trotskyist–Zinovievist elements’.
4The decree in effect
demanded the total destruction of former oppositionists.
In the following few months mass arrests were carried out in the eco-
nomic, state and party institutions. In January 1937 there took placethe second great Moscow trial of the so-called ‘Parallel Anti-Soviet Trotskyist Centre’.
The ﬁrst results of the purge were reviewed by the Central Commit-
tee plenum of February–March 1937. On the eve of the plenum theSector of Leading Party Organs of the Central Committee, headed by G. M. Malenkov , compiled inventories ( spravki ) of nomenklatura ofﬁcials
of various departments. The spravki comprised several lists. In the ﬁrst
were listed the names of leading ofﬁcials, who had already been dis-missed from their posts, expelled from the party and arrested. In theremaining lists were given the names of other ofﬁcials who had not yetbeen arrested but who had committed various ‘sins’: who had partici-pated in the different oppositions, who ‘had deviated’, who had in thepast been members of other parties etc.
5The majority of those named
in these lists were soon to be repressed.
The spravka which Malenkov prepared for Stalin and dated 15 
February 1937 noted the great number of former party members in theUSSR. (Many of the facts and theses from the spravka were noted by
Stalin in his speeches to the February–March plenum.) Malenkov wrote:
It should be noted in particular that at the present time in the country
there number over 1,500,000 former members and candidate members88 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
2Izvestiya TsK KPSS , 1989, no. 8, p. 84.
3Ibid., pp. 100–15.
4Ibid., no. 9, p. 39.
5RTsKhIDNI, 17/71/43, 44, 45, 46 etc.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
of the party , who have been expelled and mechanically dismissed at
various times from 1922 onwards. In many enterprises there are con-centrated a signiﬁcant number of former communists, with the resultthat sometimes they exceed the numerical composition of the partyorganisations which work in these enterprises’.
For example at the Kolomenskyi locomotive building works, the spravka
noted, compared to 1,408 communists there were 2,000 former partymembers; at the Krasnoe Sormovo works there were 2,200 membersand 550 former members, at the Moscow Ball Bearing Works 1,084members and 452 former members, etc.
6
Many of the participants at the February–March plenum spoke of
the presence in the country of a great number of ‘anti-Soviet elements’,and ‘offenders’. The secretary of the West Siberia kraikom R. I. Eikhereported that in 11 years from 1926 to 1937 in the krai 93,000 indi-viduals were expelled from the party whilst in the krai party organisa-tion at the beginning of 1937 there were 44,000 communists. ‘ Amongstthose expelled’, Eikhe declared, ‘there are no small number of directenemies of the party . They were in the party , they acquired certain polit-ical habits and will attempt to utilise this against us.’ In the krai, Eikhecontinued, there lived also a great number of exiles, former kulaks.Amongst these there remained ‘a not insigniﬁcant group of inveterateenemies, who will attempt by all means to continue the struggle’.
7The
secretary of the party organisation of Turkmeniya, Popok, also spoke ofthe evident danger which was posed by former kulaks who had returnedfrom imprisonment and exile: The great number of kulaks who passedthrough Solovki and other camps and now as ‘honourable’ toilersreturn home, demand allotment of their land, making all kinds ofdemands, going to the kolkhoz and demanding admission to thekolkhoz.’
8At the plenum others emphasised the fact of the existence of
millions of believers in the country with many priests who retained nosmall inﬂuence.
9The necessity of continuing the struggle with enemies
was indicated by the main reports to the plenum from Stalin, Molotovand Ezhov .
In the months following the February–March plenum the policy of
unmasking and arresting former oppositionists continued. On 23 May1937 the Politburo sanctioned the expulsion from Moscow, Leningradand Kiev to the ‘non-industrial regions of the Union’ of all those expelledfrom the party for membership of the various oppositions together withTHE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 89
6RTsKhIDNI, 17/2/773, 115.
7V oprosy istorii , 1993, no. 6, pp. 5–6.
8Ibid., p. 25.
9Ibid., no. 5, pp. 4–5, 14–15; no. 6, pp. 8, 21–2.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
those accused of ‘anti-Soviet manifestations (the dissemination of
hostile views in lectures and in the press)’. Those expelled also includedthe families of those sentenced to be shot for political crimes, and thosesentenced to imprisonment for ﬁve years and upwards. On 8 June thePolitburo sanctioned the expulsion from the Azov–Black Sea krai toKazakhstan of the families of ‘arrested Trotskyists and rightists’.
10In
March–June 1937 there continued the arrest of party and state leadersat various levels. Mass arrests now began in earnest in the leadership ofthe Red Army .
Up until the middle of 1937, therefore, the main blow of repression
was directed against members of the party , mainly those who had intheir time participated in the oppositions or who had shown some kindof dissent with Stalinist policies. Repression began also in the organs ofpower: inside the NKVD many of Yagoda’s people were arrested, in thearmy cases were fabricated against a number of senior military ofﬁcers.The new stage in the purge was heralded by the decision of the Polit-buro of 28 June 1937, ‘Concerning the uncovering in West Siberia ofa counter-revolutionary insurrectionary organisation amongst exiledkulaks’. The resolution ordered the shooting of all ‘activists of the insur-rectionary organisation’. To speed up the investigation of their cases atroika was established comprising the head of the NKVD of WesternSiberia (Mironov), the procurator of the krai (Barkov) and the party sec-retary of the krai (Eikhe).
11
Within a few days the practice of establishing troiki was extended to
the whole country . On 2 July 1937 a Politburo resolution ‘Concerninganti-Soviet elements’ sanctioned the carrying out of operations whichbecame a pivot of the mass repression of 1937–8. By a resolution of thePolitburo the following telegram was sent to the secretaries of the oblastcommittees, krai committees and the Central Committees of nationalcommunist parties:
It is noted that the majority of former kulaks and criminals, who were
exiled, at one time from various oblasts to the northern and Siberianregions and then with the completion of the sentences of exile havereturned to their oblasti – are the main instigators of all kinds of anti-Soviet and diversionary crimes.
The Central Committee ordered the secretaries of oblasti and krai
organisations and all oblast, krai and republican representatives of theNKVD to take account of all kulaks and criminals who returned to theirareas of domicile so that the most hostile of them should be immediately90 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
10Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya papka.
11Ibid.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
arrested and shot. These cases were to be handled administratively
through the troiki, whilst the remainder, the less active but still hostileelements, were to be resettled and sent to the regions designated by theNKVD.
The Central Committee required the local authorities within ﬁve days
to present to the Central Committee the composition of the troiki, andthe number to be shot as well as the number to be exiled.
12
In the following weeks lists of the troiki and information concerning
the number of ‘anti-Soviet elements’ were received from the localities,and on this basis orders were prepared within the NKVD for the imple-mentation of the operation. On 30 July Ezhov’s deputy in the NKVD, M. P . Frinovskii, who had been assigned responsibility for implementingthis action, sent to the Politburo for its approval the NKVD’s operationalorder NOO447, ‘Concerning the operation for repressing former kulaks,criminals and other anti-Soviet elements’. The order ﬁxed the beginningof the operation, depending on region, from 5–15 August; it was to becompleted in four months’ time.
Above all the order laid down ‘the contingents to be subject to repres-
sion’. In reality it included all who in whatever degree had struggledagainst Soviet power or had been victims of former repressions: kulaks,those released from or who had ﬂed from exile, former members of dis-banded parties (SRs, Georgian Mensheviks, Mussavats, Dashnaks etc.),former White Guards, surviving tsarist ofﬁcials, those arrested, chargedwith terror and spying-diversionary activities, political prisoners, thoseheld in labour camps etc. On one of the later places in this list wereincluded criminals.
All those to be repressed, in accordance with this order, were divided
into two categories: ﬁrst those subject to immediate arrest and shooting;second those subject to imprisonment in labour camps or prison forperiods from 8 to 10 years. All oblasti, krais and republics in the orderwere assigned quotas ( limity ) for those to be repressed for each of the
two categories (on the basis of information concerning the number of‘anti-Soviet elements’, which the local authorities had sent to Moscow).A total of 259,450 individuals were to be arrested, of these 72,950 wereto be shot (including 10,000 in the camps). These ﬁgures were deliber-ately incomplete since the quotas omitted a number of regions of thecountry . The order gave local leaders the right to request from Moscowadditional quotas for repression. Moreover, to those imprisoned incamps or in exile might be added the families of the repressed.
Troiki were established in the republics, krais and oblasti to decide the
fate of those arrested. As a rule they included the narkom or adminis-THE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 91
12Trud , 4 June, 1992, p. 1.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
trative head of the NKVD, the secretary of the corresponding party
organisation and the procurator of the republic, krai or oblast. The troikiwere accorded extraordinary powers, to pass sentences (includingshootings) and issue orders for their implementation without any check.On 31 July this order of the NKVD was approved by the Politburo.
13
From the end of August the Central Committee received from local
leaders requests to increase the quotas for repression. From 27 Augustto 15 December the Politburo sanctioned increasing the quotas forvarious regions for the ﬁrst category by almost 22,500 and for thesecond category by 16,800 individuals.
14
Besides the general operation to liquidate ‘anti-Soviet elements’ there
were organised several special actions. On 20 July 1937 the Politburoordered the NKVD to arrest all Germans, who were working in defencefactories and to deport some of them abroad. On 9 August the Politburoconﬁrmed the order of the NKVD USSR ‘Concerning the liquidation ofthe Polish diversionist group and organisation POV’ (Polish Organisa-tion of Military Personnel). On 19 September the Politburo approved the NKVD order ‘Concerning measures in connection with the terroristdiversionary and spying activities of Japanese agents of the so-calledHarbintsy’ (former workers of the Chinese Eastern Railway , who hadbeen resettled in the USSR following the sale of the Chinese EasternRailway to Japan in 1935).
15
In the second half of 1937 there was carried out also the mass expul-
sion from frontier regions of ‘unreliable elements’. The largest expulsionwas the deportation from the Far Eastern krai of the entire Korean population to Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan which was implemented onthe basis of the Central Committee – Sovnarkom resolution of 21August 1937 with the stated aim of ‘suppressing penetration by Japanese espionage in the Far Eastern krai’.
16
An important component part of the mechanism of mass repression
was the conducting of numerous trials both in the capital and in thelocalities. As distinct from the secret courts and the absolutely secret sessions of the troiki open trials fulﬁlled an important propaganda role.Therefore sanction for the conducting of the main trials was givendirectly by the Politburo. It also as a rule determined in advance the sen-tence, most commonly shooting. The Politburo was especially active in92 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
13Ibid.
14Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya papka. See also Moskovskie novosti , 21 June 1992,
pp. 18–19.
15Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya papka. On the fate of the Harbintsy see: A.
Suturin, Delo kraevogo masshtaba (Khabarovsk, 1991) pp. 195–213.
16See Belaya kniga o deportatsii koreiskogo naseleniya Rossii v 30–40-kh godakh (M., 1992)
tom. 1.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the second half of 1937 in sanctioning the organisation of these trials.
From 8 August to 17 December 1937 the Politburo approved the con-ducting of about 40 trials in various regions of the country .
17
At the beginning of 1938 signals were issued from Moscow, which it
seemed, indicated a cessation of the purge. On 9 January the Politburoruled as incorrect the dismissal from work of relatives of individuals,arrested for counterrevolutionary crimes, only on the grounds of theirbeing relatives, and charged the USSR’s Procurator, A.Ya. Vyshinskii togive corresponding instructions to the organs of the procuracy .
18On 19
January the press published the resolution of the Central Committee,‘Concerning the mistakes of party organisations in the expulsion ofcommunists from the party , of the formal-bureaucratic attitude toappeals of those expelled from the CPSU and of measures for correctingthese deﬁciencies’, which demanded greater attention to the fate ofparty members. Certain token measures in connection with these reso-lutions was undertaken by the leadership of the USSR’s Procuracy andby Narkomyust.
19
The true meaning of these political manoeuvres still remains
obscure. Certain indications concerning the preparation of the cam-paign allow us to assert that the operation against the ‘anti-Soviet elements’, as noted above, was to be completed in four months, i.e. byNovember–December 1937 (depending on region). It is possible, thathaving this circumstance in mind Stalin was prepared at the beginningof 1938 to terminate the purge and that he wished to give a clear signalto this effect to the January plenum of the Central Committee. In supportof such a proposition might be cited the fact that the announcement of the ‘relaxation’ at the beginning of 1939 at the XVIII party congresswas also carried through on the basis of the slogan for a more attentiveattitude to the fate of communists. The report on this question at theJanuary plenum and at the XVIII party congress were both made by G. M. Malenkov .THE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 93
17It is difﬁcult to give precise ﬁgures for the number of trials sanctioned by the Politburo
since in a number of cases the resolution does not give a precise ﬁgure. For example on 14 November 1937 the Politburo instructed the Archangel obkom to conduct two or three cases of ‘wreckers in the timber industry’. From the decisions of the Politburo itis also not always clear whether they had in mind an open trial. For example on 15November the Politburo charged the Novosibirsk obkom that ‘those apprehended con-cerning the explosion at Prokop’evsk should be brought before the court and shot, theshooting to be publicised in the Novosibirsk press’ ( Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya
papka ).
18RTsKhIDNI, 17/3/994, 56. This resolution was formulated as a resolution of
Sovnarkom USSR of 10 January 1938 (GARF , 5446/57/53, 27).
19P . H. Solomon Jnr., ‘Soviet Criminal Justice and the Great Terror’, Slavic Review , vol.
46, no. 3, 1987, pp. 405–6.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Whatever the truth of this argument the resolution of the January
plenum of 1938 remained no more than a political declaration. Thepurge could not be completed in four months. On 31 January 1938 thePolitburo adopted the proposal of the NKVD USSR ‘Concerning the con-ﬁrmation of additional numbers of those subject to repression of formerkulaks, criminals and active anti-Soviet elements’. By 15 March (in theFar East by 1st April) it was prescribed, within the operation for elimi-nating ‘anti-Soviet elements’, to repress an additional 57,200 individu-als, of whom 48,000 were to be shot. Correspondingly the powers of thetroiki, who were to carry out this work, were extended.
20Also on 31
January the Politburo authorised the NKVD to extend until 15 April theoperation for destroying the so-called ‘counterrevolutionary nationalistcontingent-Poles, Letts, Germans, Estonians, Finns, Greeks, Iranians,Harbintsy , Chinese and Romanians’. Furthermore, the Politburocharged the NKVD that it should complete by 15 April analogous opera-tions and destroy ( pogromit’ ) the cadres of Bulgarians and Macedonians,
both those of foreign origin and those who were citizens of the USSR.
21
After conﬁrming these new quotas for repression the history of the
previous year was repeated: local leaders began to request increasing thequotas and extending the duration of the operation. From 1 Februaryto 29 August 1939 the Politburo approved additions to the Januaryquotas for those to be repressed by about 90,000 people.
22And this
meant also in fact approving the breaching of the April deadline on theduration of the operation.
In 1938 the campaign of political trials was continued. For the year
as a whole the Politburo sanctioned the conducting of about 30 trials,of which seven were in January 1938.
Only in the autumn of 1938 was the terror reined in. The exami-
nation of cases by the troiki was forbidden by the directive ofSovnarkom-Central Committee of 15 November 1938.
23The joint 
Sovnarkom-Central Committee resolution of 17 November 1938forbade the carrying out of ‘mass operations for arrest and exile’.
24On
24 November Ezhov was released from his post as narkom of the NKVD.The great terror was brought to an end.
This brief enumeration, which does not cover all the actions, that
comprised what is known as the great terror, allows us to make someobservations.94 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
20Moskovskie novosti , 21 June 1992, p. 19.
21Ibid.
22Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya papka. It is not possible to determine precisely
what proportion of these were subject to be shot, since in many cases the Politburo conﬁrmed general ﬁgures for the ﬁrst and second category .
23For the text of this directive see Moskovskie novosti , 21 June 1992, p. 19.
24Istoricheskii arkhiv , 1992, no. 1, pp. 125–8.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The mass repression of 1937–8 was unquestionably an action
directed from the centre; which was planned and administered fromMoscow . The Politburo gave orders for the carrying out of the variousoperations, it approved the operational orders of the NKVD, it sanc-tioned the organisation of the most important trials. The question of theactivities and reorganisations of the NKVD, and the appointment of theresponsible ofﬁcials of this commissariat, occupied in 1937–8, to judgefrom the protocols, the leading place in the Politburo’s work.
The activity of the troiki, as already noted, was regulated by means
of quotas on the numbers to be incarcerated in camps and those to be shot. Sentences imposed on a signiﬁcant proportion of those tried by the Military Collegium of the USSR’s Supreme Court, the military tribunals and other ‘judicial bodies’ were in fact determined in advanceby the Politburo’s Commission for Legal Matters and conﬁrmed by the Politburo. In this period the Commission for Legal Matters pre-sented its protocols for the approval of the Politburo once a month on average. The texts of these protocols remain unavailable. But evi-dently they include the 383 lists ‘of many thousands of party , soviet,Komsomol, military and economic workers’ which, as N. S. Khrushchevrevealed at the XX party congress, Ezhov sent to Stalin to be approved.
25
(Ezhov was included in the composition of the Politburo Commission on Legal Matters on 23 January 1937
26and evidently during the 
repression played a leading part in it). An example of one of these lists was given in the speech by the deputy chairman of the Committeeof Party Control Z. T . Serdyuk at the XXII party congress in October1961:
Comrade Stalin,
I send for your approval four lists of individuals which are to be
sent to the Court of the Military Collegium.1. List 1 (general)2. List 2 (former military ofﬁcials)3. List 3 (former workers of the NKVD)4. List 4 (wives of enemies of the people)I request that you sanction that they all be sentenced to the ﬁrst category .
Ezhov .
27
In spite of the fact that the majority of directives concerning the
terror were formulated as decisions of the Politburo their true author,THE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 95
25Reabilitatsiya. Politicheskie protsessy 30–50 kh. godov , (M., 1991) p. 39.
26Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya papka.
27XXII s”ezd Kommunisticheskoi partii Sovetskogo Soyuza; Stenograﬁcheskii otchet , t. III (M.,
1962) p. 152.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
judging from the existing documents, was Stalin. The Politburo itself in
the years of the terror evidently met irregularly . On 14 April 1937 therewas adopted the resolution ‘with the aim of preparing for the Politburoand in case of especial urgency – also for the resolution of questions ofa secret character . . . to create attached to the Politburo of the CC CPSU
a permanent commission comprising of comrades Stalin, Molotov ,Voroshilov , Kaganovich, L., and Ezhov’.
28The inclusion in this group of
Ezhov (who, incidentally , became only a candidate member of the Polit-buro several months later) testiﬁes to the fact that this simpliﬁed proce-dure was designed primarily to examine questions relating to theNKVD’s activity . This was so in practice. Several resolutions, judging byall the evidence, Stalin adopted in fact on his own. The directives of theCentral Committee to the localities about the arrests and organisationof trials bore Stalin’s signature.
29In a number of cases Stalin dispatched
telegrams with instructions from himself in person. For example on 27August 1937 in reply to a request from the secretary of the Westernobkom of the party , Korotchenko, concerning a trial of ‘wreckers activein agriculture in Andreevskii raion’ Stalin telegraphed: ‘I advise you tosentence the wreckers of Andreevskii raion to be shot, and the shoot-ings to be publicised in the local press.’ A similar telegram from Stalinpersonally the same day was sent to Krasnoyarsk obkom.
30With a great
measure of conﬁdence it is possible to assert that when the documentsfrom the Presidential archive are available, much more evidence will berevealed concerning Stalin’s leading role in the organisation of theterror.
The centralised initiation and direction of the terror as a whole does
not mean that there were no elements of a spontaneous character.Indeed they existed in all such actions – during the course of collectivi-sation, and forcible grain requisitioning in 1932–3, in the so-calledstruggle against ‘terrorism’ following the murder of Kirov etc. In ofﬁciallanguage these phenomena were referred to as ‘excesses’ ( peregib ) or as
breaches of socialist legality . To the ‘excesses’ of the mass repression of1937–8 it is possible to adduce the high number of deaths during inter-rogation or the exceeding by local organs of the quotas for arrests andshootings established by Moscow etc. For example, according to incom-plete information, the troika of the NKVD of Turkmeniya from August1937 to September 1938 tried 13,259 individuals although they had alimit of only 6,277.
31This fact of exceeding the quota by more than
double, and also the murder of prisoners under investigation, which was96 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
28RTsKhIDNI, 17/3/986, 16.
29Tsentr khraneniya sovremennoi dokumentatsii , 89/48/2, 3, 7, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16, 17, 20.
30Izvestiya , 10 June 1992, p. 7.
31Protokoly zasedanii Sekretariata Tsk VKP (b) osobaya papka.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
concealed by the local organs and not given in accounts, must be taken
into consideration in assessing the total number of those repressed.
However, as a whole such spontaneity or initiative by local authori-
ties was planned, deriving from the nature of the orders which wereissued by the centre, from the constant demands of Moscow to‘strengthen the struggle with the enemy’, from the assignment to theNKVD of the primary task of ruthlessly implementing and breaking allminor attempts to oppose the terror. Up to a certain point the leadershipof the country in fact encouraged breaches of their own directives,untying the NKVD’s hand, although it was fully cognisant of the factthat the terror went beyond the limits established by the ‘controlﬁgures’.
As the mass terror of 1937–8 was an action which was directed from
the centre, it is logical to ask what aims did it serve for the organisers ofthe repression and in particular for Stalin. This problem has been repeat-edly examined in the literature. Historians have directed attention tosuch facts as the elimination of a signiﬁcant proportion of those com-munists with pre-revolutionary party service, the growing threat of anew war, the replacement of the ruling elite, the unstable state ofStalin’s own psychology etc. What we know today regarding the mech-anisms of the ‘Great Terror’ allows us to assert that the main aim of themass repression of 1937–8 was the removal of all strata of the popu-lation, which in the opinion of the country’s leaders were hostile orpotentially hostile.
The purge at the end of the 1930s was carried out in accordance with
the policy of repression implemented in earlier years. The actions thatfollowed one another – expulsions from the party and the arrest of oppo-sitionists, collectivisation and ‘dekulakisation’, the struggle with ‘sabo-tage of grain requisitioning’ and ‘theft of socialist property’, arrests andexile after the murder of Kirov , mass expulsions from the party andarrests in the course of the exchange of party documents etc. – affectedmany millions of people. By the middle of the 1930s in the country , asalready noted, there were 1.5 million former party members, millions ofprisoners in the labour camps and in the so called labour settlements.There were also millions of people who were free but who at varioustimes had been brought to legal account etc. A great problem for thegovernment was the return from exile of ‘kulaks’ who by the middle ofthe 1930s were being released and under the new Constitution hadtheir rights restored. Thus the number of those with a grudge ( obizhen-
nyi) and thus under suspicion (together with their families) included a
signiﬁcant proportion of the country’s population. In the conditions ofa threat of a new war many of them were considered as a potential ‘ﬁfthcolumn’. Amongst those who fell under the constant suspicion of theTHE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 97
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Kremlin leadership were the immigrants, representatives of national
minorities, many of whom had certain contacts with their co-nationalswho lived abroad.
With certain of the formerly repressed individuals the government
attempted reconciliation. The resolution of TsIK and Sovnarkom USSRof 16 January 1936 for example foresaw lighter punishments or earlyrelease of some of those sentenced by the notorious law of 7 August1932 concerning the safeguarding of socialist property .
32The narkom
of Justice Krylenko and chairman of the Supreme Court of the RSFSRBulat, informed M. I. Kalinin, chairman of TsIK USSR, that in imple-menting this resolution by July 1936 (the resolution foresaw the workwould be completed in six months) more than 115,000 cases were to bereexamined. Almost 49,000 of those imprisoned had their sentencescut and about 38,000 were released. This aroused amongst severalhundred of prisoners the expectation of being granted a full amnesty .
33
A still larger action of a similar kind occurred when the mass repres-
sion was in full swing. On 23 October 1937 the Politburo charged theUSSR’s Procuracy and Narkomyust to carry out for the whole union andautonomous republics, krais and oblasti a check on criminal cases,which involved those who had held positions in the village soviets,kolkhozy , MTS, as well as village and kolkhoz activists. They were tocheck all cases beginning from 1934. At the same time the Politburoundertook to drop cases and free from punishment those kolkhoznikiaccused of minor offenses (property , administrative infringementsetc.).
34This action continued for more than two years.35The examina-
tion of criminal cases involved 1.5 million people. By 10 March 1940were delivered spravki concerning the quashing of convictions on almost
450,000 people and releasing from prison almost 30,000. The casesagainst 128,000 people were closed, whilst 25,000 had their punish-ments reduced.
36
On 22 October 1938 Sovnarkom USSR adopted a resolution which
authorised the granting of passports to the children of those in speciallabour settlements and in exile on attaining 16 years of age ‘on thegeneral basis and not to place in their way obstacles to go to education98 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
32Approved by the Politburo on 15 January 1936 (RTsKhIDNI, 17/3/974, 174).
33RTsKhIDNI, 78/7/207, 1–2.
34Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya papka.
35On 27 July 1939 Sovnarkom USSR adopted a resolution ‘Concerning the reexamina-
tion of cases of individuals from the kolkhozy and village aktiv , judged in 1934–1937’,which recognised the unsatisfactory course of presenting evidence for gaining convic-tions and demanded the completion of this work in its entirety for the whole country by1 November 1939 (GARF , 17/57/60, 1).
36GARF , 5446/30/277, 24–8.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
or to work’, although it preserved restrictions on departure to so called
‘regime localities’. Before the war about 100,000 people were releasedfrom exile by this resolution.
37
However, the Stalinist leadership always considered terror as its main
method of struggle with a potential ‘ﬁfth column’. The cruel repressionof 1937–8 was above all determined by biographical particulars. The basis for shooting or dispatch to the camps might be an unsuitablepre-revolutionary past, participation in the civil war on the side of theBolsheviks’ enemies, membership of other political parties or opposi-tionist groups within the CPSU, previous convictions, membership of‘suspect’ nationalities (Germans, Poles, Koreans etc.), ﬁnally family connections and association with representatives of the enumeratedcategories. Corresponding accounting of all these contingents of thepopulation through the years was done by the NKVD and the partyorgans. Following orders from Moscow to the localities the lists werecompiled and on this basis arrests were carried out.
Already in the order of the NKVD N00447 ‘Concerning the opera-
tion for the repression of former kulaks, criminals and active anti-Sovietelements’ the organs of the NKVD were instructed to investigate ‘allcriminal contacts of those arrested’. As revealed by numerous memoirsand documents the fulﬁlment of this task was one of the main objec-tives of the NKVD’s staff. Adopting torture, they fabricated numerouscases of ‘counterrevolutionary organisations’, in which were numberedthe friends, co-workers and relatives of those arrested. On this basis new arrests were carried out. The repression was thus extended to those strata of the population which formally were not subject to thepurge. Some of those judged in the purge by biographical data wererehabilitated at the end of 1938–9.
It was by these crude means that the repression was carried out
amongst members of the party and leading workers both in the centreand in the localities. At ﬁrst those arrested were those who in their timehad participated in oppositions or had some ‘political deviation’ (the listsof such workers, compiled on the basis of the study of archival mater-ial, was in the hands of the NKVD). Then on the basis of their testimony ,obtained in many cases by torture and duress, new arrests were carriedout. For 1936 alone 134,000 people were expelled from the party , in1937 more than 117,000 and in 1938 more than 90,000.
38Some of
them were reinstated. However, many were arrested after their expul-sion. As a result of the purge of the party the composition of the rulingTHE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 99
37V . N. Zemskov , ‘Kulatskaya ssylka v 30-e gody’, Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniya , 1991,
no. 10, p. 19–20.
38RTsKhIDNI, 17/117/873, 23.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
elite changed substantially . At the beginning of 1939 the Sector of
Leading Party Organs accounted 32,899 leading workers, which wereincluded in the nomenklatura of the Central Committee (narkoms of theUSSR and RSFSR, their deputies, heads of chief administrations andobedinenie of the commissariats and their deputies, administrators oftrusts and their deputies, directors and chief engineers of many indus-trial enterprises, directors of MTS and sovkhozy , heads of the politicaldepartments ( politotdely ) of the sovkhozy , directors of higher educa-
tional institutions and scientiﬁc-research institutes, chairmen of oblastand krai ispolkoms, heads and deputy heads of departments ofispolkoms, heads of railway lines and construction projects etc.). Ofthese 43 per cent were promoted to work in 1937–8. Still more signiﬁ-cant was the replacement of the leading party workers. Of 333 secre-taries of obkoms, kraikoms and Central Committees of nationalcommunist parties who were working at the beginning of 1939 194were promoted in 1937–8; of 10,902 secretaries of raikoms, gorkomsand okrugkoms of the party 6,909 were appointed to their posts in1937–8.
39The changes in the apparat took place through the advance-
ment of young ofﬁcials and workers.
Not all by any means of the leaders who were repressed suffered for
‘political unreliability’ (past political sins or close contact with formeroppositionists). As with other strata of the population there wereamongst the leading workers who suffered many who had an unblem-ished biography . Researchers have repeatedly noted that with the helpof the terror the Stalinist leadership resolved a real existing problem ofreplacing the older cadres with younger and more educated people.
40For
Stalin such a cadres revolution also had political signiﬁcance. On theone hand, the promotees, younger cadres advanced as a consequence ofthe repression, were more amenable to the vozhd’ than the old guard.
On the other hand it was possible to place all responsibility for formerlawlessness, economic errors, the difﬁculties of life of ordinary Sovietpeople on the repressed leaders.
Those leaders who were repressed did indeed bear their share of
responsibility for what had taken place in the country . The dictatorshipcreated the conditions which allowed incredible abuses of power tooccur, and many ofﬁcials took full advantage of this. Having previouslyencouraged the tyranny of local leaders, the Moscow vozhd’ in the years
of terror turned against these leaders and actively demonstrated his resolution to ‘defend’ the people from bureaucrats and enemies. Forexample on 14 May 1937 the Politburo examined the question of the100 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
39RTsKhIDNI, 477/1/41, 62–83; 477/1/51, 153–4.
40S. Fitzpatrick, ‘Stalin and the Making of a New Elite’ in S. Fitzpatrick, The Cultural
Front : Power and Culture in Revolutionary Russia (Ithaca, 1992) pp. 149–82.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
cases of assaults on kolkhozniki in various raions of Kursk oblast and
adopted a proposal submitted by Vyshinskii
on the adoption by the courts in cases of assaults on kolkhozniki and 
their public humiliation, of deprivation of freedom as a means of punish-ment, reviewing sentences that imposed insufﬁciently harsh punish-ments in these cases. To publish in the local press sentences for the mostimportant cases, connected with assaults on kolkhozniki and their publichumiliation.
41
On 10 June 1937 the Politburo examined the cases of a number of ofﬁ-
cials of Shiryaevskii raion in Odessa oblast who were accused of humil-iating kolkhozniki. The Procurator of the USSR was charged to sendinvestigators to Shiryaevskii raion to examine the most important casesand to complete the investigation in ten days time. The matter was heardby the Ukrainian Supreme Court in open session in the locality . The sen-tences were published in the press, both local and central.
42A specially
secret point of this resolution envisaged the sentencing of all the guiltyin the case to loss of liberty from 3 to 10 years imprisonment.
43This
policy appears to have been applied widely . In numerous open trialswhich were carried out in all regions of the country , those judged –mainly local leaders – were most often accused of abuse of power andcoercion. The victims of their oppression – ordinary citizens – often gaveevidence in the courts. The reports of such ‘show-trials’ were carried inthe press.
44
This policy it seems bore fruit. In the memoirs of a peasant woman
from Novosibirsk oblast, M.D. Mal’tseva, who herself was subject to‘dekulakisation’ and exile, she recounts the period of mass repression ofthe 1930s:
People suffered so much in that time, but one never heard people criticis-
ing Stalin; only the local leaders were blamed; only they were criticised.Because of them we all suffered, and how many people died because ofthem is unknown. I don’t know, perhaps I am wrong, but I say that in1938 many were taken, perhaps because they heeded our tears, sincethere were good reasons to take them, that’s what I think.
45
Similar opinions, it seems, were widespread.THE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 101
41RTsKhIDNI, 17/3/987, 229.
42RTsKhIDNI, 17/3/987, 492.
43Protokoly zasedanii Politbyuro, osobaya papka.
44S. Fitzpatrick, ‘How the Mice Buried the Cat: Scenes from the Great Purges of 1937 in
the Russian Provinces’, The Russian Review , vol. 52, July 1993, pp. 299–320.
45V ozvrashchenie pamyati. Istoriko-publitsisticheskii al’manakh (Novosibirsk, 1991) pp.
209–10.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
With the aim of discovering the reasons for the instigation of the
mass repression of 1937–8 it is necessary to take into account the fol-lowing circumstance. Terror and force were one of the basic methodsfor creating the Stalinist system. In this or that measure with their helpwere resolved practically all social-economic and political problems –the securing of social stability , raising industrial production, ensuringStalin’s personal power etc. These and other factors at each stage underwrote the existence of state terror and mass repression. Howevereach of the terror campaigns in turn raised the level of coercion higher,since so to speak the ‘usual level’ had its concrete reason. For examplethe mass exile of peasants at the beginning of the 1930s served thepurpose of collectivising the countryside. The terror at the end of1932–3 was a means of escaping from the sharp social-economic andpolitical crisis which developed between the ﬁrst and second Five-YearPlans. The mass repression of 1937–8 also had its direct causes, asnoted above.
In the mind of the Stalinist leadership this was precisely a purge of
society , an attempt by one blow to rid themselves of all those who in thisor that measure had been subject to coercion in the preceding years orhad fallen under suspicion on some other count. This operation wasconceived as a means of eliminating a potential ‘ﬁfth column’ in a periodwhen the threat of war was increasing, and also as a means of dispos-ing of loyal cadres who for various reasons were no longer needed byStalin.
This view of the purges as a means of eliminating a potential 
‘ﬁfth column’ is not new . The argument was forcefully advanced by theAmerican ambassador in Moscow in the 1930s, Joseph E. Davies.
46
Trotsky , whose writings Stalin avidly read, repeatedly warned of thedanger of a prolonged war (whether in the case of victory or defeat), inthe absence of a revolutionary upsurge in the west, leading to a capi-talist restoration, ‘a bourgeois Bonapartist counter-revolution’ in theUSSR.
47Isaac Deutscher in his classic biography of Stalin gives an imag-102 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
46Joseph E. Davies, Mission to Moscow (London, 1942).
47L. D. Trotsky , The Revolution Betrayed (London, 1967) p. 229. Trotsky quoted the 
following passage from The Fourth International and War , published in 1935: ‘Under 
the inﬂuence of the critical need of the state for articles of prime necessity , the individu-alistic tendencies of the peasant economy will receive a considerable reinforcement, and the centrifugal forces within the collective farms will increase with every month . . .In the heated atmosphere of war, we may expect . . . the attracting of foreign allied
capital, a breach in the monopoly of foreign trade, a weakening of state control of thetrusts, a sharpening of competition between the trusts, conﬂicts between the trusts and the workers, etc ....I n  other words, in the case of a long war, if the world pro-
letariat is passive, the inner social contradictions of the Soviet Union not only might, butmust lead to a bourgeois Bonapartist counterrevolution.’
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
inary conversation between Stalin and the ghost of Nicholas II where
the relationship between war and regime stability is discussed.48
It might be noted further that this was indeed the whole thrust of
Stalin’s two reports to the Central Committee plenum in February–March 1937, as well as the reports of Molotov , Ezhov , Kaganovich and others. The revelations from the archives now strongly rein-force that view . It is supported by evidence from the directives of thehighest leadership of the country concerning the implementation ofthe purge in 1937–8, by the way these actions were understood by contemporaries, and by the explanations given later by Stalin’s own colleagues.
49
Writing his ﬁnal, agonized letter to Stalin in December 1937, appeal-
ing for his life to be spared, emphasising his loyalty and respect for Stalinpersonally , Bukharin noted the ‘great and courageous idea of a generalpurge’, associated with war preparations and paradoxically the transi-tion to democracy , heralded by the Stalin Constitution. The purge, henoted, directed at the guilty , those under suspicion and those who mightwaver, should ensure a ‘full guarantee’ for the leadership in the event ofan emergency .
50
The most explicit statements in support of this view were uttered by
Molotov in the 1970s, when he declared:
1937 was necessary . If you take into account that after the revolution we
chopped right and left, achieved victory , but the survivals of enemies ofvarious tendencies remained and in the face of the growing threat offascist aggression they might unite. We were driven in 1937 by the consideration that in the time of war we would not have a ﬁfth column . . .
And there suffered not only the clear Rightists, not to speak of the 
Trotskyists, but there suffered also many who vacillated, those who didnot ﬁrmly follow the line and in whom there was no conﬁdence that at acritical moment they would not desert and become, so to speak, part ofthe ‘ﬁfth column’.
Stalin, in my opinion, pursued an absolutely correct line: so what if one
or two extra heads were chopped off ( puskai lishnyaya golova sletit ), there
would be no vacillation in the time of war and after the war.
51THE OB JECTIVES OF THE GREAT TERROR ,1937–1938 103
48I. Deutscher, Stalin: A Political Biography (Harmondsworth, 1968), pp. 373–4.
49M. Sholokhov for example wrote in 16 February 1938 to Stalin: ‘Cases of apprehen-
sion as part of the purge of the rear need also to be rechecked. Those apprehended includenot only active Whiteguardists, emigres, executioners in a word those whom it is neces-sary to apprehend, but under this rubrik have been taken away also true Soviet people’(Istochnik , 1993, no. 4, p. 18).
50Istochnik , 1993, no. 0, p. 23.
51Sto sorok besed s Molotovym. Iz dnevnikov F . Chueva (M., 1991), pp. 390, 391, 416. See
also the memoirs of G. Dimitrov in Sovershenno sekretno , no. 12, 1990, pp. 18–20.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The complex relationship between war and revolution, which had
almost seen the tsarist regime toppled in 1905 and which ﬁnallybrought its demise in 1917, was a relationship of which Stalin wasacutely aware. The lesson of history had to be learnt lest history repeatitself.
Further Reading: The Great T error
Robert Conquest, The Great Terror: A Reassessment (New York, 1990).
J. Arch Getty , “ ‘Excesses are not Permitted’: Mass Terror and Stalinist 
Governance in the Late 1930s,” The Russian Review , vol. 61, no. 1 (2002).
J. Arch Getty , Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party Reconsid-
ered, 1933–1938 (New York, 1985).
J. Arch Getty and Oleg V . Naumov , eds., The Road to Terror: Stalin and the Self-
Destruction of the Bolsheviks, 1932–1939 (New Haven, 1999).
James R. Harris, The Great Urals: Regionalism and the Evolution of the Soviet
System (Ithaca, 1999).
Oleg V . Khlevniuk, In Stalin’s Shadow: The Career of ‘Sergo’ Ordzhonikidze
(Armonk, NY , 1995).
Hiroaki Kuromiya, Freedom and Terror in the Donbas: A Ukrainian–Russian 
Borderland, 1870s–1990s (New York, 1998).
Gabor T . Rittersporn, Stalinist Simpliﬁcations and Soviet Complications: Social 
Tensions and Political Conﬂicts in the U.S.S.R., 1933–1953 (Chur, NY , 1991).
Peter H. Solomon, Jr., Soviet Criminal Justice Under Stalin (New York, 1996).
Robert Thurston, Life and Terror in Stalin’s Russia ,1934–1941 (New Haven,
1995).104 OLEG KHLEVNYUK
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The Welfare State
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
5
Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as 
a Civilization
Stephen Kotkin
Excerpted from Stephen Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism 
as a Civilization (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1995).
Editor’s IntroductionThe end of the Cold War and collapse of the Soviet Union has generated
not only new archival research on Stalinism but new conceptual frame-works as well. Some scholars have begun to reintegrate Soviet historyinto the more general course of European history and to view Staliniststate practices as having roots in the aims and technologies of the modernstate. This approach, while continuing to stress the fundamental ideolog-ical and operational differences of the Stalinist system, sees Stalinism notas the anomalous product of factors unique to the Soviet Union but ratheras a particular incarnation of more general intellectual and political devel-opments in modern Europe.
Among the most signiﬁcant of these developments were new forms of
social science and medical knowledge which prompted European reform-ers to reconceptualize the population as a social entity to be rationallystudied and managed. Social statistics, for example, provided governmentofﬁcials and non-government professionals with a statistical representa-tion of their societies and a conﬁdence that they could reshape or eventransform those societies for the betterment of the country as a whole.The belief that populations and newly identiﬁed social problems could beunderstood and acted upon scientiﬁcally gave rise to a new ethos of socialintervention.This ethos was widely shared among social thinkers and stateofﬁcials of various political orientations, and it underlay a range of state
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
welfare programs introduced throughout Europe in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries.1
A comparative examination of the Stalinist system reveals that it shared
both this interventionist ethos and many of the state welfare programsdeveloped in western European countries. Welfare programs providedvaluable beneﬁts to the retired, disabled, and unemployed. But the welfarestate also entailed highly normative assumptions about the way peopleshould live, and intervention in people’s lives to impose purportedly scientiﬁc norms upon them. State welfare practices thus included public health inspections, sanitary regulations, quarantines, home visitsfrom medical personnel, instruction on infant care and childraising, stateremoval of children from parents deemed negligent, and other normativeinterventions to establish a rational and productive order in people’s lives.When attached to an ideological agenda of social and human transfor-mation, as in the Soviet case, state intervention to reorder human societycould take extreme forms and have dire consequences.
In the selection that follows, Stephen Kotkin ﬁrst put forward the 
argument that Stalinism was an extreme, socialist form of the Europeanwelfare state. Taking as his starting points the Enlightenment and FrenchRevolution, Kotkin places Stalinism squarely in the context of Europe’sintellectual and political heritage. He explains that the very idea of reshap-ing society originated with eighteenth-century Enlightenment thinkers,who believed they could apply science to create a rational social order.
2
The French Revolution in turn gave this idea force by demonstrating thatrevolutionary politics could bring about social transformation. Revolu-tionaries in Russia drew inspiration from the French Revolution, and afterthey themselves came to power in 1917, they pursued their own versionof a rational and just social order – one which sought to eliminate capi-talist exploitation and social classes.
Kotkin points out that the class divisions that Stalin and his fellow 
Communist leaders sought to overcome were also a central part of European history – a legacy of nineteenth-century industrialization whichhad destroyed the alleged organic unity of traditional agrarian societiesand replaced it with class-stratiﬁed cities. An array of European thinkers pondered how to recover social unity, Karl Marx being just one of many108 STEPHEN KOTKIN
1For further discussion, see David L. Hoffmann, “European Modernity and Soviet Social-
ism,” in Hoffmann and Yanni Kotsonis, eds., Russian Modernity: Politics, Knowledge, Practices
(New Y ork, 2000).
2Conservative thinkers have also pointed to the Enlightenment as the ultimate source of
Stalinism; see Richard Pipes, Communism: A History (New Y ork, 2001). In contrast to this
conservative or Burkean framework, which warns against any attempt to change social tra-ditions, Kotkin is operating from a leftist or Foucauldian orientation. This approach cri-tiques the Enlightenment not for its attack on traditional norms but for its imposition ofnew behavioral standards, which, far from being objective, were in fact highly normativeand contrary to their purported goal of human liberation.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
who grappled with this problem.3Marx envisioned violent revolution as
the means to overthrow the capitalist system, and ultimately to achievea classless, socialist society. In the mid-1930s, Stalin declared that thebases of socialism had been achieved and that collectivization and thestate-run economy had succeeded in eliminating the exploiting classes andclass conﬂict.
The Stalinist system also established extensive state welfare beneﬁts,
again putting into practice ideas and programs that originated in westernEurope. These beneﬁts included state-sponsored disability and retirementpensions, free medical care, state-funded housing, and guaranteed employ-ment for all citizens. Kotkin therefore concludes that Stalinism was notan anomaly resulting from Stalin’s evilness, Russia’s social backwardness,or Marxist ideology. Instead the Soviet Union under Stalin embodied,more than any other country, the elements of “progressive modernity” –a coordinated, purposeful economy and a government of national unitydedicated to the well-being of the population and country as a whole.
4In
the book from which this excerpt is drawn, Kotkin focuses mostly uponthe socialist elements of the Stalinist order which distinguished the SovietUnion from other countries and made Stalinism a distinct “civilization.”But his work nonetheless put forward a new comparative framework fromwhich to approach Soviet history, and he and other scholars have pursuedthat framework subsequently.
5STALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 109
3Katerina Clark places Marxist thought in its broader intellectual context of “Romantic
Anticapitalism” – a term she uses to describe the ideas of a variety of thinkers who criti-cized capitalist society for its alienation, individualism, and commodiﬁcation of culture.Romantic anticapitalism informed the thinking of many western European and prerevolu-tionary Russian intellectuals, Marxist and non-Marxist alike, and hence contributed to theintellectual and cultural ecosystem from which Stalinism emerged. Clark’s book representssomething of a landmark work in that it places Soviet cultural history in this broader com-parative framework; Katerina Clark, Petersburg: Crucible of Cultural Revolution (Cambridge,
Mass., 1995).
4The paradigm of neo-traditionalism has been counter-posed to an understanding of 
Stalinism as exemplifying elements of modernity. But these two historiographical approa-ches are not necessarily mutually exclusive. Neo-traditionalism involved the use of traditions for modern mobilizational purposes; it was only after industrialization and urban-ization largely destroyed traditional folk culture, that political leaders invented traditionsto galvanize popular support in the age of mass politics and mass warfare. For more onneo-traditionalism, see T erry Martin, “Modernization or Neo-traditionalism? AscribedNationality and Soviet Primordialism,” in Hoffmann and Kotsonis, eds.
5Stephen Kotkin, “Modern Times: The Soviet Union and the Interwar Conjuncture,” 
Kritika , vol. 2, no. 1 (2001); Peter Holquist, “‘Information is the Alpha and Omega of our
Work’: Bolshevik Surveillance in its Pan-European Context,” The Journal of Modern History ,
vol. 69 (1997); Amir Weiner, “Nature, Nurture, and Memory in a Socialist Utopia: Delin-eating the Soviet Socio-Ethnic Body in the Age of Socialism,” The American Historical Review ,
vol. 104, no. 4 (1999) – excerpted in this volume; David L. Hoffmann, “Mothers in theMotherland: Stalinist Pronatalism in its Pan-European Context,” Journal of Social History , vol.
34 (2000).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Kotkin’s excerpt below also highlights the importance of subjectivity as
a topic for investigation. In examining the Soviet city of Magnitogorsk(which means Magnetic Mountain in Russian), he stresses the ways that,under Stalinism, average citizens developed a sense of themselves as sub-jects. Soviet citizens had no choice but to engage with the political, eco-nomic, and social structures of everyday life under Stalinism. Whetherthey eagerly participated in, circumvented, or resisted the Stalinist system,people’s identity and behavior were deﬁned in relation to it. Soviet powerin this sense was productive as well as repressive; it created possibilitiesand new modes of self-identiﬁcation, even if many people identiﬁed them-selves in opposition to it.
6As Kotkin writes, the historian of Stalinism
needs to explain how the aspirations of Stalin and his fellow leaders inter-acted with those of ordinary people in the Soviet version of the welfarestate.110 STEPHEN KOTKIN
6For an example of scholarship on Stalinist subjectivity, see Hellbeck in this volume.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a
Civilization
Stephen Kotkin
Science, Utopia, and Revolutionary Politics
It is impossible to comprehend Stalinism without reference to the 
eighteenth-century European Enlightenment, an outpouring of im-passioned public discussion that took as its point of departure the seventeenth-century innovation of modern “science.” Applying the newmodels of nature to the political world, many thinkers during theEnlightenment embarked on a quest for an explicitly “rational socialorder,” a well-regulated organization of human beings independent ofthe “arbitrary” authority of a sovereign. Arguably it was the Frenchphilosophe Condorcet – the ﬁrst to give wide currency to the expression
“science of society” – who conferred the prestige of Newtonian scienceon the search for a rational social order. For Condorcet, among others,science offered “the means to transform the social world” at the sametime as it “suggested the model of the rational social organization to beimplemented.” Above all, science promised not simply the possibility ofimmediate improvement but “a vision of constant progress.”
1
What gave this worldview tremendous force was, of course, the
French revolution, which appeared to offer a mechanism for realizing thevision of a rational social order. To be sure, the revolution brought fortha variety of applications, including the ideas and practices of liberalism,a “radical” strand of republicanism rooted in notions of equality , andBonapartist dictatorship. But each of these different traditions emergedfrom the common source of what came to be called “revolutionary politics.” This innovation signaled a simple yet profound discovery: thatpolitics could be used to direct and possibly even remake society .
2
1Keith Baker, Condorcet: From Natural Philosophy to Social Mathematics (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1975), pp. 385–6. Baker notes the important role that Condorcet reserved for the “scientiﬁc elite,” who were charged with guiding socialprogress – a mission reminiscent of the one assumed in Russia by the Bolshevik party .According to Condorcet, the elite, made up of people of “superior intellect,” wassomehow to be bound by the principle of democratic consent, but no mechanism wasspeciﬁed. The centrality of the Enlightenment and Condorcet for understanding theRussian revolution was impressed upon me by Martin Malia.
2Lynn Hunt, Politics, Culture, and Class in the French Revolution (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1984), p. 3.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Many of the Russian revolutionaries were guided by a highly devel-
oped awareness of the bewitching French experience and conceived oftheir own actions as an elaboration of that great chain of events, in thedirection of what they imagined to be a more genuine version of radicaldemocracy . Rather than a democratic order in the name of the nation,which allegedly concealed the class rule of the bourgeoisie, the Russianrevolutionaries envisioned what was supposed to be a more inclusiveorder founded on the putative universality of the proletariat. Paradoxi-cally , the goal of greater inclusiveness was to be reached by means ofﬁerce class warfare and exclusion. Nonetheless, in the reinvention ofrevolutionary politics on the basis of class, the Russian revolutionarieswere still following the central vision of the Enlightenment. The Russianrevolution, too, was about using politics as a means for creating a rational, and therefore just, social order.
Not only did the revolution in the Russian empire partake of the most
highly valued traditions in European history , but even the revolution’sostensibly exotic class character was quintessentially European, aneffect of the nineteenth-century fossil-fuel industrialization that hadswept England and the continent and rendered problematic the univer-salism of the Enlightenment’s vision. Indeed, far from beginning withthe Russian revolution, the task of reconstituting “the nation” by alle-viating, or somehow overcoming, deep class divisions had been a centralpreoccupation throughout Europe for nearly a century – especially inthe great “kingdom of the ideal,” German-speaking Central Europe,where the inspiration for a speciﬁcally proletarian revolution originated.
It was, of course, Karl Marx who combined the Enlightenment’s
application of scientiﬁc rationality to society with the French revolu-tion’s discovery of the magic of politics and proclaimed the deﬁnitivescience of society aimed at bringing about the ultimate political revolu-tion that would eliminate the class divisions wrought by industriali-zation. Profoundly inﬂuenced by the great elaborator of the Frenchrevolution, Georg W . F . Hegel, who had articulated a dynamic vision ofthe progressive movement of history , Marx named his design for afuture, classless society “socialism” – a term already in wide use that sig-niﬁed either the amelioration or, more often, the complete transcen-
dence of what were the truly appalling living conditions of Europe’sworking majority .
3
Emphasizing transcendence, Marx and his followers believed his con-
ception of socialism to be new . In a famous essay entitled “Socialism:Utopian and Scientiﬁc” (1880), Friedrich Engels argued that if withHegel the world began to be viewed as a developmental process, with the112 STEPHEN KOTKIN
3George Lichtheim, The Origins of Socialism (New York: Praeger, 1969).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
onset of industrialization and the rise of the working class in the 1830s
socialism had ceased to be “an accidental discovery of this or that inge-nious brain” and had become instead “the necessary outcome” of alarger historical struggle governed by scientiﬁc laws. Accordingly , thetask for critical analysis was no longer to imagine a society as perfect aspossible but to lay bare the present pattern of socioeconomic rela-tions in which the next “stage” of historical development was alreadynascent. Marx, according to Engels, had done just that for the “capital-ist mode of production,” and thus with Marx “socialism had become scientiﬁc.”
4
Engels’s distinction between utopian and scientiﬁc socialism, which
was embraced by the Soviet state, has been dismissed by philosopherswho argue that Marxian socialism was in fact no less utopian than the unattainable visions of Fourier or Owen. Far from having been“science,” the argument goes, Marxism was nothing more than a bogusreligion claiming falsely to be science.
5But the historian should not so
quickly dismiss Marxism’s claim to be scientiﬁc. This claim inspired mil-lions of people, both inside and outside the Soviet Union, and informedthe thinking of much of what went on under Stalin (and after), from theestablishment of economic planning and school curricula to the capac-ity for opposition to the regime.
If the scientiﬁcity of Marxian socialism needs to be taken seriously ,
however, so does its utopian aspect. Like the Enlightenment mentalityout of which it grew, Marxian socialism was an attractive schema forrealizing the kingdom of heaven on earth. Of course, as a supremerationalist of the nineteenth-century type, Marx himself never wrote autopia. But he asserted that a utopian society would – indeed must –come about for the sake of humankind, and his voluminous, often eso-teric writings inspired the most extensive effort ever to realize just suchan outcome in the eastern fringes of Europe. That the scientiﬁc utopi-anism of Marx found an appreciative audience in the Russian empirewas due to the speciﬁcities of Russian history , especially to certainintensely felt aspirations that predated the 1917 revolution and foundexpression in the revolutionary process. . . .
Stalinism in fact revived the revolutionary utopianism that had been so
encouraged during the Civil War but that had suffered a blow in 1921when the “Peasant Brest-Litovsk” policy of replacing grain requisition-STALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 113
4The pamphlet, an extract from the polemic commonly known as Anti-Dühring (1878),
can be found in Robert C. Tucker, ed., The Marx–Engels Readers , 2d ed. (New York: Norton,
1978), pp. 683–717.
5Leszek Kolakowski, Main Currents of Marxism , vol. 3 (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1981), pp. 523–30.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ing by a tax-in-kind was extended beyond Tambov province.6The exten-
sion of the tax-in-kind was followed by other measures that togethercoalesced into what was dubbed the New Economic Policy (NEP), whichpartially legalized the anathema of private trade and the market,reversed much of the holy-grail policy of nationalization of urban prop-erty and industry , yet failed to generate convincing signs of the anti-cipated new world associated with socialism.
7During the NEP , the
dictatorship of the proletariat was beset by high unemployment, risingprostitution, millions of orphaned children (many of whom roamed thecountry engaging in criminal activities and forming gangs), and anexplosion of private trade. The authorities were largely at a loss as towhat to do about these ills and the disappointment they fostered.
8
Back at the Tenth Party Congress in March 1921, when the hesitant
steps that led to the NEP were taken over strenuous objections, Leninhad asked apologetically , “How could one start a socialist revolution ina country like ours without dreamers?”
9As the 1920s wore on, many114 STEPHEN KOTKIN
6In August–September 1920, after the Civil War was essentially won and the threat of
a restoration of landowner rights ended, there had been a massive uprising by a peasantarmy against the Bolsheviks. This peasant or “Green Army” which mobilized around20,000 troops and was similar in organization to the Red Army , was defeated by a RedArmy force more than double its size. At the same time, central authorities also madeconcessions in Tambov , introducing a NEP avant la lettre . Oliver Radkey , The Unknown Civil
War in Soviet Russia: A Study of the Green Movement in the Tambov Region, 1920–1921(Stanford: Hoover Institution, 1976). The analogy to the capitulatory treaty signed withthe Germans in March 1918 – a desperate gamble that paid off when the Germans sur-rendered to the Allies in November – was made by Bukharin, and repeated by Riazanovduring the debate on the tax-in-kind decree at the Tenth Party Congress. Desiatyi s”ezd
Rossiiskoi kommunisticheskoi partii: Stenograﬁcheskii otchet (Moscow, 1926), p. 255. In
many regions, including Siberia, Central Asia, and Ukraine, the introduction of the tax-in-kind was purposely delayed for as long as a year.
7The NEP was not introduced by a single decree. Laws and decrees were issued like an
avalanche throughout 1922 and 1923. These were notable for the many restrictionsthey carried against trade in certain goods, and the many limitations they maintainedon private manufacturing and the hiring of labor. In 1923, moreover, the regime beganbacking away from some of the provisions of the NEP , and though the NEP did receivesomething of a second wind in 1924–5, it was again partially rolled back in 1926. Thisambivalence and grudging tolerance characterized the entire existence of the NEP . Itshould also be kept in mind that during this time, the regime remained a dictatorship;there may have been a “cultural” NEP , but there was no “political” NEP . See E. H. Carr,The Bolshevik Revolution, 1917–1923 , vol. 2 (New York: Macmillan, 1952), pp. 269–359.
8Alan Ball, Russia’s Last Capitalists: The Nepmen, 1921–1929 (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1987); Roger Pethybridge, One Step Backwards, Two Steps Forward: Soviet
Society and Politics under the New Economic Policy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990).
9On the question of what was deemed within and outside the realm of possibility in the
Russian context, see the perceptive comments by Silvana Malle, The Economic Organiza-
tion of War Communism, 1918–1921 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985),
pp. 495–6.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
people had begun to wonder just what had happened to the great dream
of a new Russia and to the powerful class rhetoric of haves versus have-nots, oppressors versus oppressed, for not only had industrial produc-tion barely managed to climb back to 1914 levels, but the most strikingresults of the revolution seemed to be the formation of a new urbanbourgeoisie, the Nepmen, and an incipient alliance ( smychka !) between
what few party ofﬁcials there were in the countryside and a new ruralbourgeoisie, the kulaks.
10
To be sure, the NEP had a constituency , which stretched beyond 
the so-called Nepmen and kulaks to embrace elements of the expand-ing state bureaucracy (largely the Commissariats of Finance and Agriculture) and certain sections of the Communist party .
11The
country had recovered. But even to many of those who supported theNEP , the socialist revolution seemed to have lost much of its momen-tum. Proposals for putting the revolution back on track, either largelywithin or even outside the NEP framework, were hotly debated through-out the decade,
12but it was unclear what, if anything, might come of
them – until 1929, when the country was suddenly launched on whatwas called the Great Break ( velikii perelom ).
The precipitating factor behind this colossal improvisation may have
been the grain crises of the late 1920s. But the Great Break’s signiﬁ-cance extended well beyond the regime’s self-inﬂicted showdown withthe peasantry , a confrontation that, it needs to be recalled, took placeagainst the background of deep-seated anxieties about capitalist encir-clement and the Red Army’s inability to ﬁght a war against the advancedEuropean countries. In the context of this perceived vulnerability , theGreat Break promised not only to secure the regime’s political controlover the countryside but also to bring about in the shortest possible timewhat Russia had not been able to achieve in several centuries: to becomean undisputed great power and, what was more, an example for the restof the world to admire and emulate, by building socialism.
13
That the initial launching of this remarkable turn of events could
have been determined essentially by one man turned out to be anotherSTALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 115
10The contradictions of the NEP , especially when juxtaposed against the apparent cer-
tainties of the Civil War (at least in retrospect), are treated, along with the crucial impor-tance of the institutional nexus of the Red Army , in Mark von Hagen, Soldiers in the
Proletarian Dictatorship: The Red Army and the Soviet Socialist State, 1917–1930 (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1990).
11The mood during the NEP both inside and outside party circles has been well-described
by Nikolai Valentinov [Volskii], Novaia ekonomicheskaia politika i krizis partii posle smerti
Lenina (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 1971).
12Alexander Erlich, The Soviet Industrialization Debate, 1924–1928 (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1960).
13Further discussion of the Great Break appears in the introduction to part 1.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
of the unforeseen yet central developments of the revolution during the
1920s. Lenin, the socialist revolution’s undisputed moral and politicalleader and the symbol of the new Russia, fell ill and died (exerting vir-tually no inﬂuence on policy matters during the last two years of hislife). After a nasty struggle, Stalin emerged as Lenin’s successor, ﬁllinga role already created by his predecessor but then remaking it into a per-sonal despotism.
14This Stalin achieved not only by his oft-remarked
dominance of the bureaucracy , but also by his careful attention to ques-tions of ideology and their relation to political power.
15Not Bukharin,
the party’s “theorist,” nor Trotsky (by far the most original mind amongthe Bolsheviks) but Stalin ﬁrst systematized the “foundations ofLeninism” – and through constant maneuvering made sure he was recognized as Leninism’s main arbiter.
16
Whatever concessions or apologies Stalin continued to make at meet-
ings of the politburo or Central Committee, as soon as the meetingsadjourned he retreated to his ofﬁce atop the apparat and acted virtually116 STEPHEN KOTKIN
14Since the 1960s, there has been much talk in the historiography of the “alternatives”
to Stalin, with attention focusing on Trotsky and Bukharin. Despite being a Jew, Trotskydid probably have the potential to become paramount leader following Lenin’s death, butfor a variety of reasons he lost out. Bukharin never had such a chance. Discussion of a“Bukharin alternative” is not simply a matter of whether he had an alternative “plan”of action, but whether Stalin might have chosen to follow it, for once Trotsky wasdefeated, there was no alternative to Stalin’s rule, barring accidental death or assassina-tion. For an analysis of the succession problem that represents a step forward, see LarsLih, “Political Testament of Lenin and Bukharin and the Meaning of NEP ,” Slavic Review
50, no. 2 (1991): 240–52.
15For a handy review of the explanations of Stalin’s rise to supremacy , see Chris 
Ward, Stalin’s Russia (London: Edward Arnold, 1993), pp. 7–38. Documents being
released from formerly secret archives are liable to shed considerable new light on thiscritical problem.
16I. V . Stalin, “Ob osnovakh Leninisma,” lectures at Sverdlov University published in
Pravda , 26 and 30 April 1924; and 9, 11, 14, 15, 18 May 1924; reprinted in Sochineniia ,
vol. 6 (Moscow, 1947), pp. 69–188. In addition to systematizing Leninism (in strikinglydefensive terms), Stalin apparently invented, and certainly popularized, the denigratingterm “Trotskyism” (see Sochineniia , pp. 342–57), which sealed Trotsky’s fate. It should
be kept in mind that Leninism as an ideology was not formed automatically . Stalin’s vig-orous handling of the formulation of Leninism has been remarked on by Robert Tucker,Stalin as Revolutionary, 1879–1929 (New York: Norton, 1973), pp. 316–18, 324. Sig-
niﬁcantly , although Lev Kamenev by virtue of his position as boss of the Moscow partyorganization was nominally in charge of the Marx–Engels–Lenin Institute, he gave it littleattention. The institute and its critically important documents were assiduously con-trolled by aides to Stalin from inside the apparat. See Larry Holmes and William Burgess,“Scholarly Voice or Political Echo? Soviet Party History in the 1920s,” Russian
History/Histoire Russe 9 (1982): 378–98; Niels Erik Rosenfeldt, “ ‘The Consistory of the
Communist Church’: The Origins and Development of Stalin’s Secret Chancellery ,” ibid.,pp. 308–24.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
as he saw ﬁt. Yet he always made sure that everything he did was
explained and justiﬁed within what he effectively characterized as theLeninist legacy . When Stalin mobilized the powerful class-war rhetoricof the revolution’s “heroic age” – kept alive after 1921 in patterns ofdress, images, songs, festivals, names, storytelling, a new pantheon ofheroes – and launched a vicious campaign against the kulaks, he hadno conceptual difﬁculty in presenting this, or the concurrent decisionsto push forward with the forcible collectivization of agriculture andaccelerate the pace of industrialization, as a continuation of the workbegun by Lenin and October.
17He went further, however, and, in re-
revolutioning the revolution, skillfully invoked scattered remarks byLenin on the importance of national strength and explicitly tied the
building of socialism to imperial Russian history .
18
As masterful a political inﬁghter as Stalin proved to be, he could
scarcely have succeeded in garnering the required support for such animmense mobilization without the vision of building socialism he wasable to articulate, and the genuine passions that such a bold plan for abountiful world, remade along class lines, evoked among many people.As the decade of the 1930s began, the great eastern country’s time inthe sun seemed to have truly arrived. The terrible ordeals of the “impe-rialist war,” Civil War, epidemics and famine had not, after all, been invain. The Stalin revolution seemed like the second, and potentially morelasting, dawn of a just, pure, merry , and beautiful Russia, where he whowas nothing would become everything.STALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 117
17More serious were the considerations that (1) just such a course had been advocated
by the so-called left opposition, which Stalin had vanquished as part of his bid for absolutepower; and (2) that certain circles in the party , upon whom he had relied to destroy theopposition, were against the leftist course. Stalin rhetorically dismissed the resemblanceof the Big Drive to the program of the left opposition, at the same time shifting attentiononto those whom he castigated as the “right opposition.”
18Stalin’s revolution has been called a “revolution from above,” a characterization that
was ofﬁcially incorporated by the Soviet regime in the short course party history pub-lished in late 1937 as a description of collectivization. In fact, such a notion had beenadvanced by an émigré Orthodox Christian socialist, Georgii Fedotov , Problemy budushchei
Rossii tom 1 (1931; St. Petersburg, 1991), p. 229. (I am grateful to Professor Wada
Haruki for bringing this source to my attention.) Echoing such commentators, RobertTucker has treated the oft-noted resemblance to past tsars invoked by Stalin not as theresult of efforts to generate legitimacy for state policies by means of crafted historicalanalogies but as a factual model that inspired Stalin’s actions and as an accurate char-acterization of the social, political, economic, and cultural order formed under him. Sucha view tends to downplay considerations of property , class, and socialism. Tucker, Stalin
in Power: The Revolution from Above, 1928–1941 (New York: Norton, 1990). For a dis-
cussion of the concept “revolution from above” in Russian history , see E. H. Carr, Social-
ism in One Country , vol. 1 (New York: Macmillan, 1958), pp. 9–10.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The City and the Welfare State
Nowhere was the euphoric sense of the revolution’s renewed possib-
ilities in the 1930s more in evidence than at Magnetic Mountain.Numerous other instant cities were also created, such as Komsomolsk-na-Amure, Novokuznetsk (Stalinsk), and Karaganda, while virtually all established urban centers underwent such dramatic expansion andtransformation that they became in effect new cities.
19(Indeed, accord-
ing to the January 1939 census, in the twelve years since the Decem-ber 1926 census the registered urban population of the Soviet Unionjumped from 26.3 to 55.9 million.)
20But Magnitogorsk remained 
the quintessential emblem of the grand transformation whereby theEnlightenment goal of using science to perfect society , having beenbonded to the French revolution’s discovery of political mobilization andﬁltered through industrialization and the attendant rise of the workingclass, had become a reality one could participate in ﬁrst-hand. Thisprospect transﬁxed large numbers of foreign observers, as well as manyof the inhabitants of the USSR.
That Magnitogorsk, as the encapsulation of the building of socialism,
appeared to embody the Enlightenment dream, once improved, wouldhave been reason enough for the world attention it received. At the same118 STEPHEN KOTKIN
19A partial list of new Soviet cities built between the wars can be found in “Goroda
postroenny pri sovetskoi vlasti,” Bloknot agitatora , no. 1 (1948): 23–33. In some ways
even Moscow had come to resemble Magnitogorsk. B. I. Nikolskii, artistic director of theMagnitogorsk theater, speaking at a party meeting of the city’s Kirov raikom in 1936
remarked that “I am an old Muscovite. I lived forty years in Moscow . When the Malytheater suggested I go to Magnitogorsk, I must confess, my face did not express joy orgreat desire.” But Nikolskii went on to assert that the difference between Moscow andMagnitogorsk was “not that great.” He observed that “living in Magnitogorsk, you don’tfeel as you do living on Moscow’s Kuznetskii Most, but as if you were living a bit fartherout, in the outskirts, say , on the Boulevard of Enthusiasts, where gigantic constructionis going on.” Magnitogorskii rabochii , 21 December 1936.
20Data from the suppressed 1937 census have ﬁnally become available, conﬁrming the
long suspected need to modify downward the total population in 1939. But such a cor-rection would have little effect on the magnitude of the expansion of the urban popula-tion. Even considering that some of the urban growth was the resuit of reclassiﬁcation,the USSR certainly underwent the largest urban expansion in a single decade that theworld had known up to that time. See Chauncy Harris, Cities of the Soviet Union: Studies
in Their Functions, Size, Density, and Growth (Chicago: Association of American Geogra-
phers, 1972), pp. 1, 61, 89–90; Adolf G. Rashin, “Rost gorodskogo naseleniia v SSSR(1926–1959 gg.),” Istoricheskie zapiski , no. 66 (1960): 269–77; E. Andreev et al., “Opyt
otsenki chislennosti naseleniia SSSR 1926–1941 gg. (kratkie rezultaty issledovaniia),”V estnik statistiki , 1990, no. 7, pp. 34–58; and V . A. Isupov , “lgra bez pravil: Perepisi nase-
leniia SSSR v 30-e gody ,” Sovetskaia istoriia: Problemy i uroki (Novosibirsk, 1992), pp.
149–67. An often unremarked point is that the population of Gulag sites was apparentlyclassiﬁed as urban.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
time, Magnitogorsk also appeared to exemplify the unique beneﬁts sup-
posedly derived from the advance of urbanism. Before the revolution inRussia, cities were feared as anomalies of development and dangerousthreats to the sociopolitical order, but after 1917 they came to be viewedas the epitomes of progress and therefore the prime bulwarks for theexisting order. More than that, cities were welcomed as the traininggrounds for producing the armies of model citizens whose collectiveactivities would increase the Soviet state’s great-power potential. Eventhough on the eve of the war in 1941, still only one-third of the popu-lation lived in cities, the revolution in Russia was a decidedly urban-centered one.
Revolutionary Russia’s embrace of the city could claim an extended
genealogy in the experience of Europe, where cities had long been cele-brated as the principal agents of civilization.
21Before the Enlightenment
gave birth to the notion of a science of society , a tradition of trying toimagine the ideal city arose whereby cities served as the settings for, andthe objects of, analyses of how best to organize human affairs, a goalthat presupposed continual regulation by centralized authority .
22It was
this legacy that helped make possible, and in turn came to be elaboratedby , the Enlightenment (which took place more or less simultaneouslythroughout the great urban centers of Europe).
23This legacy also made
feasible the programs for the state regulation of society in the name ofthe commonweal, beginning in the nineteenth century with efforts toSTALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 119
21For an example and continuation of this tendency , see Jacques le Goff, “The Town as
an Agent of Civilization,” in Carlo Cipolla, ed., The Fontana Economic History of Europe
and the Middle Ages (New York, 1972), pp. 77–106. A handy survey of the development
of the social scientiﬁc study of the city in the United States, beginning with the writingsof sociologists at the University of Chicago in the ﬁrst decades of the twentieth century ,is provided by Ulf Hannerz, Exploring the City: Inquiries toward an Urban Anthropology
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1980). Hannerz omits any comment on the factthat the analysts of the city live in it, or that his own advocacy of an urban anthropol-ogy is an artifact of city life.
22As the great urbanist Lewis Mumford pointed out, until the late nineteenth century ,
discussion of the city was largely limited to Utopian literature. “City ,” in International
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences , vol. 2 (New York: Macmillan and the Free Press, 1968),
p. 448. Echoing Mumford, the literary critic Northrop Frye also pointed out that Utopia“is primarily a vision of an orderly city and a city-dominated society .” Frye, “Varieties ofLiterary Utopias,” Daedalus 94 (1965): 323–47; quote from 328.
23Lewis Mumford, The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects
(New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1961). Gwendolyn Wright and Paul Rabinowhave asserted that the advent of the writings on cities was connected with the ﬁfteenth-and sixteenth-century rise of administrative states (out of the great postfeudal territor-ial monarchies), and with the corresponding new problem then posed of administeringnot just territories but also inhabitants. Wright and Rabinow, “Spatialization of Power,”Skyline , 1982.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
confront the special problems of urban life and urban populations and
continuing into the twentieth.
In the grand narratives of European history , the nineteenth century
most often appears as the period when the twin challenges of the Frenchand Industrial revolutions transformed the various old regimes intomodern polities with parliaments, political parties, and universal malesuffrage – in short, into what today we recognize as “democracy .” Sucha narrative of the birth of “the bourgeois world,” which triumphed inthe Great War when all remaining old regimes collapsed, has been givensubstantial support by the fact that European states, their elites, andopposition groups were themselves preoccupied with the problem ofhow to respond politically to the new conditions brought about by theFrench and Industrial revolutions.
24
There is, however, another story , one that begins before 1789 and
continues well after 1914: the formation of the welfare state. This other,parallel development is largely one of social regulation – procedures,rules, categories, and social practices, almost all of which arose outsidethe state but came to be taken over by it – as well as self-imposed nor-malization and micro-level resistance. A far less visible historical drama,not of political parties and parliamentary clashes but of identities andthe clever tactics used in the invention of daily life, the formation of thewelfare state was linked to the efforts at paciﬁcation in Europe’s colonies,a process that took place simultaneously and exerted a reciprocal inﬂu-ence on the articulation of social-control and welfare-related programs“at home.”
25120 STEPHEN KOTKIN
24To be sure, in recent years a streak of revisionism appeared that has questioned
whether feudalization of the bourgeoisie, rather than embourgeoisement of the old
regimes, should be the basic story line. In this vigorously argued challenge to the stan-dard view, however, the interpretive categories do not change; only the emphasis does.Arno J. Mayer, The Persistence of the Old Regime (New York: Pantheon, 1981). Rather than
focus on the bourgeoisie as a class, one scholar has advocated concentrating on privateproperty , the market, the public sphere, law, and voluntary associations – in short, onwhat he calls “the silent bourgeois revolution,” which might better be termed the civicrevolution. David Blackbourn, “The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie: ReappraisingGerman History in the Nineteenth Century ,” in David Blackbourn and Geoff Eley , The
Peculiarities of German History: Bourgeois Society and Politics in Nineteenth-CenturyGermany (New York: Oxford, 1984), pp. 174–205.
25Further discussion of this and related issues can be found in the innovative analysis
of urban planning and administration in French-controlled Morocco by Paul Rabinow .In contrast to the approach taken in this monograph, Rabinow focuses on the class ofadministrators (thus offering a kind of intellectual history), rather than on the socialrelations and contestations that the administrators’ actions helped produce in the urbanmilieus in which they conducted experiments. Rabinow, French Modern: Norms and Forms
of the Social Environment (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989), pp. 13, 145.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In part a conservative response to the rise of the working class and
the “dangers” it supposedly represented, especially those of contagiousdisease and political militancy , the welfare state also emerged from thevariety of concerns articulated by experts pursuing such varied goals as workplace efﬁciency , psychological normalization, and healthy po-pulations.
26Industrialists, concerned about obtaining a reliable, docile
supply of labor, and social reformers, crusading for what they took to bethe best way to minimize social costs and maximize social beneﬁts,shared a logic, even if their aims often appeared divergent. And becausethe welfare state rested on a certain social logic and a number of trans-ferable social practices, it was viable in a variety of political settings,including Stalin’s Russia.
27
Rather than being viewed as a pathological case (deviating from the
European norm because of the country’s backwardness or agrariansocial structure, the long history of Russian authoritarianism, the ex-perience of the Civil War, Marxist ideology , the single-mindedness ofLenin, or the evilness of Stalin), the USSR in a narrative of the welfarestate might appear as the standard whose uncanny success challengedthe rest of the world to respond. More than in any other country , Stalinism seemed to bring together the elements of what was then theprevalent conception and experience of “progressive modernity”: on theone hand, the deployment of a coordinated, purposeful economy , withinwhich small, supposedly inefﬁcient producers were replaced by largerand therefore mightier ones; and, on the other, the formation of a gov-ernment of national unity that was above the seeming paralysis of par-liamentary rule and unequivocally dedicated to the advancement of the
commonweal.
28STALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 121
26For an excellent critical review of the explanations for the rise of the welfare state, see
George Steinmetz, Regulating the Social: The W elfare State and Local Politics in Imperial
Germany (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993), pp. 15–40.
27One study of pensions in Denmark, Sweden, Britain, France, and Germany that sought
to demonstrate that welfare state practices normally attributed to labor movements orig-inated in bourgeois politics took as its organizing principle the development of what theauthor called risk communities. In this way , the author demonstrated that the develop-ment and functioning of the welfare state were based on a way of looking at the world,or social calculus. Unfortunately , this and virtually all other comparative studies of thedevelopment of the welfare state invariably overlook the case of the USSR. Peter Baldwin,The Politics of Social Solidarity: Class Bases of the European W elfare State, 1875–1975 (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1990). See also Francois Ewald, “Insurance and Risk,”in Graham Burchell et al., eds., The Foucault Effect: Studies in Governmentality (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1991), pp. 197–210.
28The commitment of the Soviet state to social welfare was particularly dramatic given
the prerevolutionary legacy . As one scholar has concluded, “welfare aid in Russia wasnever more than a palliative, and was rendered even more ineffective by the ravages of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Despite administrative and ﬁnancial limitations, the Soviet social
insurance system that came into being following the revolution speci-ﬁed beneﬁts (in many cases equal to total earnings) in the event of death,disability , sickness, old age, pregnancy and childbirth, or unemploy-ment, for working people and family members. In 1930, temporaryunemployment beneﬁts were abolished, but this was because, incredi-bly , unemployment itself was eliminated. By this time, moreover, theSoviet understanding of wellfare had come to include not only a guar-antee of a job for everyone, but the payment of pensions upon retire-ment (a system that was made universal in 1937). The amount ofbeneﬁts, particularly pensions, remained small, but there was no deny-ing that the Soviet state had embraced a broad conception of socialwelfare – extending from employment and income to affordablehousing, health care, and organized leisure – and had done so withoutprodding.
Not only could the USSR under Stalin plausibly assert that it had
developed the programs and practices of state-guaranteed social welfareto a greater extent than had previously been the case anywhere, but itcould do so in a way that contrasted with the fascist reaction: by embrac-ing fully the illustrious European heritage known as the Enlightenment.For all these reasons, the Soviet example, as showcased at Magnitogorsk,could be said to have exerted a direct and profound inﬂuence on the restof the world’s industrialized countries. In a word, the USSR decisivelyshaped part of the bedrock of the world in which we live, a bedrock thattoday is coming apart everywhere.
29
The Politics of Everyday Life
The Bolshevik leadership, with its grand designs for building socialism
– along with the will and wherewithal to try to realize such a goal – setwhat might be called the broad agenda for what was meant to happenat Magnetic Mountain. Important as these intentions were, they con-stitute only the beginning of the story . For one thing, the policies andprograms enacted contained irreconcilable aspects that surfaced during122 STEPHEN KOTKIN
World War I.” Yet although the USSR had less of a base to work with than other nations,
and had to overcome great calamities, it “achieved more comparatively than any othernation.” Bernice Madison, Social W elfare in the Soviet Union (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1968), pp. 3–76, 230.
29Few scholars have taken up, even in general terms, the inﬂuence of the USSR on
Western Europe and the United States (as opposed to the third world). An importantexception, although far too uncritical in its evaluation of Soviet realities, is E. H. Carr,The Soviet Impact on the W estern W orld (New York: Macmillan, 1949).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the attempts to implement them; indeed, the methods of implementa-
tion themselves were often at odds with the stated goals of programs and policies. For another, these policies and programs formed part of thelives of people, ordinary and higher-ups alike, and their actions andreactions, initiatives and responses, in signiﬁcant ways inﬂuenced howthose programs were carried out, circumvented, and changed in unfore-seen ways.
When we look closely at the USSR in the 1930s we see that the results
of building socialism were not entirely what the Bolsheviks intended(that is, what the central party decrees said should happen). This doesnot mean, however, that the intentions can therefore be ignored or dis-counted. Although it is necessary to look beyond them, such intentions,programs, and policies were responsible for the ﬁelds of action withinwhich the behavior of individuals took place. It is within these ﬁelds ofaction that we must look to see how the intentions were played, how theprograms were implemented and what their consequences were – to see,in short, what kinds of lives people were able to lead, and how theyunderstood their lives. To this end, there is no substitute for lettingpeople speak as much as possible in their own words.
30
As we shall see, the kinds of lives that the urban inhabitants came 
to lead and the identities they formed involved eager participation in, frequent circumvention of, and resourceful, albeit localized, resistanceto the terms of daily life that developed within the crusade of build-ing socialism. One resists, without necessarily rejecting, by assessing,making tolerable, and, in some cases, even turning to one’s advantagethe situation one is confronted with. An appropriate analogy is to theJapanese martial art of judo. Even when the weight of the force againstone is seemingly overwhelming, as was the case with the Soviet state,the possibility remains to sidestep and thereby use that heavy forceagainst itself.
Rather than the extension of Communist party control over more and
more areas of life, therefore, it is possible to see – without denying theheavy coercive force of the Communist project – a two-way struggle,however unequal the terms, over the drawing of lines of authority , astruggle that involved continuous, if usually indirect, challenges to theperceived rules. It is not necessary to romanticize “the people” to argueSTALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 123
30Such a line of analysis, and its implications, have been set down in detail by Pierre
Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Praxis (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1977), esp. pp. 72–87; and ibid., “The Genesis of the Concepts of Habitus and Field ,” Soci-
ocriticism 2, no. 2 (1985): 11–24. Bourdieu’s imaginative approach to social action is
ultimately embedded in a view of class domination achieved through successful manip-ulation of the state apparatus, a view whose adoption is not obligatory for those who seekto draw on his many insights.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
that simply by living life, the urban inhabitants discovered that power
was pliable. At the same time, their actions also demonstrated thatpower was productive: power relations created effects – of experience,identity , resistances. Concentrating on the rule articulation process inthe encounters of daily life involves shifting the focus from what theparty and its programs prevented to what they made possible , intention-
ally and unintentionally .
In sum, the analysis employed here begins with the party’s noncapi-
talist agenda, follows the attempts to implement that agenda, recognizesad hoc modiﬁcations in the agenda, particularly those occasioned by theactions of the citizenry (letting those citizens speak as much as possiblein their own words), regards as resistances many actions normally seenas passive or “deviant,” thereby adopting a widened view of the politi-cal, and is ultimately guided by the belief that the subject of inquiryshould include not only what was repressed or prohibited but what was made possible or produced. Put another way , this study seeks toestablish the varied and often unexpected effects of the identiﬁcation of certain issues as problems, the attempts to introduce programs andpractices to address these problems, and the struggles that ensued, espe-cially the terms on which they were fought.
Such a methodology for doing social history is derived from the writ-
ings of Michel Foucault, who focused on what he called the problem ofsubjectivity , or the processes by which individuals are made, and alsomake themselves, into subjects under the aegis of the state.
31Foucault
singled out resistances as perhaps the most important element in the formation of modern subjectivity , yet he never gave resistances theempirical attention they deserved; nor did he spell out the kinds of com-promises resistances forced on would-be social engineers at the top. Bycontrast, in this monograph the empirical investigation of resistanceswill occupy a central place, widening the analysis of subjectivity toinclude not only what Foucault designated as disciplinary techniquesbut also the politics of daily life.
32124 STEPHEN KOTKIN
31Among Foucault’s many works, the two that were most important for developing the
approach adopted in this monograph are the essay “The Subject and Power,” afterwordto Hubert Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow, Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneu-
tics, 2d ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982, 1983) and the lectures on 
Parrhesia (or the problem of truth telling in Ancient Greece), delivered at the Universityof California, Berkeley , in 1983, during and after which Foucault engaged in discussionsof methodology . I also relied on the collections Power–Knowledge: Selected Interviews and
Other Writings, 1972–1977 , ed. Colin Gordon (New York: Pantheon, 1980) and The 
Foucault Reader , ed. Paul Rabinow (New York: Pantheon, 1984), including the valuable
introductory essays by the editors.
32On the problem of daily life, I follow the Foucault-inspired analysis by Michel de
Certeau. Whereas studies of culture as a material practice (as opposed to a representa-
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
As Foucault has argued, studying power relations at the micro-level
hardly means ignoring the state. At the same time, however, he hasrepeatedly demonstrated that power is not localized in the central stateapparatus.
33This holds true even when there is thought to be no sepa-
ration between the spheres “state” and “society ,” as was the case in theUSSR, where everything was formally part of the state.
34In the chap-
ters ahead, mechanisms of power – such as mutual surveillance andself-identiﬁcation – will be shown to exist alongside the state machinery ,on a much more ordinary level, yet to sustain the state just as effectivelyas its primary institutions, including the police. In the USSR underStalin, no less than in modern France, the state understood that itspower rested on the characteristics and behavior of the people.
Applying Foucault’s work to the USSR underscores yet again the con-
tention made by the revolutionaries themselves that the enduringdrama of the Russian revolution must not be sought in the supposedblack-magic qualities of Marxism, the cunning opportunism and piti-less determination of the Bolshevik state-builders, or the evolution of the countryside in the 1920s, but in the historically conditionedmerger of long-held geopolitical objectives with potent social concerns.STALINISM AS A CIVILIZATION 125
tion of underlying social forces) have usually been preoccupied with the producer (writer,
city planner) and the product (book, city street), de Certeau focused his attention on theconsumer (reader, pedestrian). Arguing that nothing exists until it is used, he viewed“consumption” as active, every bit a form of production, and argued that the result –achieved through “the art of doing” or “making do” – should be seen as “the inventionof everyday life.” Treating urban life as a kind of strategic engagement in which even theweak have recourse to many effective stratagems, he celebrated the inventiveness ofpeople whose tactics of living are usually ignored. He also suggested that “resistance” ineveryday life should be understood less as a bid for power than as calculated circumven-tion. De Certeau’s perspective on “the appropriation of the urban milieu” provided ahealthy corrective to analyses of largely immutable “structures” and “institutions,” evenif one cannot share the full extent of his unapologetic Romanticism. The Practice of Every-
day Life (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984; originally published in French,
1980).
33Foucault, Power–Knowledge , pp. 60, 122.
34In the literature on the rise of social welfare in France, much attention has been
devoted to the conceptualization in the early nineteenth century of a realm called thesocial, which was said to lie between the state and civil society (the economy). Thisdomain became the target of intervention and regulation, and thus the basis for thewelfare state, in societies based on private property . In the USSR, however, no such sep-arate domain of the social was postulated, for the obvious reason that there was thoughtto be no division between the state and society . Jacques Donzelot, Policing of Families (New
York: Pantheon, 1979), including the foreword by Gilles Deleuze, “The Rise of theSocial”); and Donzelot, L’Invention du Social (n.p., 1984). A different view of the social
that emphasizes not its separateness but its role in enabling the interpenetration of stateand society is offered by Jürgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public
Sphere (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989), p. 231.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
National power and social welfare drove the revolutionary process and
culminated in the formation of an industrially based welfare state withan attendant consciousness. Stalinism was not just a political system,let alone the rule of an individual. It was a set of values, a social iden-tity , a way of life.
When it comes to Stalinism, what needs to be explained and subjected
to detailed scrutiny are the mechanisms by which the dreams of ordi-nary people and those of the individuals directing the state foundcommon ground in this Soviet version of the welfare state. The aim ofthis book is to convey the nature of these partially intersecting dreamsand to investigate at the level of the habitat the intricate encounters,conﬂicts, and negotiations that took place in and around the strategy of state-centered social welfare in its extreme, or socialist, incarnation.What follows, then, is an inquiry into the minutiae of urban life andhow certain ways of thinking and accompanying social practices ﬁt into the grand strategies of Soviet state building during the formativeperiod of the 1930s, when the revolution came to Magnetic Mountain.The emphasis throughout is on experimentation and discovery .
Further Reading: Soviet State Welfare and Social Intervention
Mark B. Adams, “Eugenics as Social Medicine in Revolutionary Russia,” in
Susan Gross Solomon and John F . Hutchinson, eds., Health and Society in 
Revolutionary Russia (Bloomington, 1990).
David L. Hoffmann, “Mothers in the Motherland: Stalinist Pronatalism in its
Pan-European Context,” Journal of Social History , vol. 34 (2000).
Stephen Kotkin, “Modern Times: The Soviet Union and the Interwar Conjunc-
ture,” Kritika , vol. 2, no. 1 (2001).
Bernice Q. Madison, Social W elfare in the Soviet Union (Stanford, 1968).
Kenneth Pinnow, “Cutting and Counting: Forensic Medicine as a Science 
of Society in Bolshevik Russia, 1920–1929,” in David L. Hoffmann and Yanni Kotsonis, eds., Russian Modernity: Politics, Knowledge, Practices
(London, 2000).
Susan Gross Solomon, “Social Hygiene and Soviet Public Health, 1921–1930,”
in Solomon and Hutchinson, eds.126 STEPHEN KOTKIN
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
State Violence
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
6
State Violence as T echnique: The
Logic of Violence in SovietT otalitarianism
Peter Holquist
Excerpted from Peter Holquist, “State Violence as T echnique: The
Logic of Violence in Soviet T otalitarianism,” in Amir Weiner, ed.,Landscaping the Human Garden (Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 2003).
Editor’s Introduction
A corollary to the Stalinist welfare state was the massive application of
state violence under Stalin. Soviet leaders, in addition to enacting welfareprograms to solve social problems and transform society, utilized exci-sionary violence – deportations and executions – to eliminate “sociallyharmful elements,” and did so with the same goal of social transforma-tion. They believed that the removal of social aliens would not only eradicate enemies of the Soviet regime but would purify society and movethe country toward communism. Viewed from this perspective, Stalinistterror was not a consequence of Russian backwardness or Stalin’s vindictiveness, but was instead an integral means by which Soviet leaderspursued their vision of an ideal society.
Soviet state violence reﬂected the same interventionist ethos that gave
rise to the welfare state. It too was predicated on an allegedly scientiﬁcunderstanding of society and on technologies of social intervention. Socialstatistics and social cataloguing provided the Stalinist leadership with astatistical representation of Soviet society. Deportations and concentra-tion camps offered them the means to remove entire categories of peopledeemed unﬁt due to their class background or political orientation. Ofcourse it is important to maintain a sense of human agency and toacknowledge that social science and interventionist technologies did notin themselves cause Stalinist terror – Stalin and his fellow leaders clearly
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
bear responsibility for the deportations and executions they ordered. But
modern concepts and practices allowed Soviet leaders to conceive of andimplement excisionary violence, and thus provided a necessary thoughnot sufﬁcient condition for Stalinist terror. In this sense, Stalinism cannotbe understood apart from the modern conception of society as an arti-fact to be sculpted through state intervention.
On the surface it seems paradoxical that the Stalinist regime deployed
welfare programs and state violence simultaneously. Why would a gov-ernment extend health and welfare beneﬁts, housing, education, and jobsto its citizens, yet at the same time arrest, deport, and execute millionsof people? But when considered alongside one another, it becomes clearthat state welfare and state violence were two dimensions of the samephenomenon – state intervention to refashion society according to anidealized vision of the social order. As discussed in the previous selection,this intervention was not unique to the Soviet Union and reﬂectedbroader European trends. In the twentieth century, state violenceincreased throughout Europe, as governments practiced forced steriliza-tions, deportations, internments, and exterminations on an enormousscale.
The First World War marked something of a watershed in the deploy-
ment of state violence. Wartime exigencies led to vastly increased statepowers, including surveillance and internments designed to ensure theloyalty of the population. In most countries, these forms of state inter-vention were subordinated to the existing constitutional order once thewar ended, but the Soviet system was formed at this moment of totalwar, and wartime practices became part of the new social and politicalorder. The revolutionary origin of the Soviet state also meant fewer insti-tutional and moral constraints on the ambitions of Communist Partyleaders, who applied state violence to pursue their own ideological vision.A comparative examination of Stalinist state violence, then, allows one tohighlight the distinctive as well as the common features of Soviet socialpractices. Similar social conceptions and state practices assumed very dif-ferent forms when enacted in different political and ideological settings.
1
In the following selection, Peter Holquist analyzes the origins of
modern state violence. He notes that the very possibility of using coer-cion in ways the Soviet government did was predicated on a science ofsociety and the deﬁnition of a social ﬁeld to which this model of sciencecould be applied. Such a conception of society as a realm for scientiﬁcstudy was widely held by government ofﬁcials throughout nineteenth-century Europe, including in tsarist Russia. Tsarist bureaucrats compiled130 PETER HOLQUIST
1For further discussion, see David L. Hoffmann and Peter Holquist, Cultivating the Masses:
The Modern Social. State in Russia, 1914–1939 (Ithaca, forthcoming).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
extensive statistics on the population of the Russian empire, and they
came to express a preference for homogeneity, identifying ethnic minori-ties as potentially disloyal or harmful. During the First World War,the tsarist government acted upon this statistical representation of thepopulation by deporting up to one million Jews, Germans, and otherethnic minorities from the western borderlands. Holquist thus highlightsthe First World War as a crucial watershed in the implementation of stateexcisionary violence.
Such violence continued during the Russian Civil War, when both sides
– the Reds (Communists) and the Whites (anti-Communists) – sought tocategorize the population, and carried out mass executions of thosedeemed harmful. Communists described their policy of de-Cossackization(the elimination of Cossacks) not as a defensive military action but ratheras a measure to remove malignant social “elements” and ensure the healthof society. For that reason Holquist characterizes Soviet state violence asbased not only on social cataloguing but on an aesthetic vision of the idealsociety. In that sense, social statistics and interventionist technologieswere the means by which Soviet leaders pursued their ideological goal ofbuilding socialism.
Throughout the 1920s and 1930s the Soviet government compiled
what Holquist calls a vast human archive. Through censuses, question-naires, and an internal passport system, Soviet ofﬁcials sought to knowtheir society and every person in it. This archive of the population iden-tiﬁed those individuals who, by virtue of their social origins or anti-Sovietactivity, were slated for excision. Ofﬁcials even categorized “anti-Sovietelements” as more or less harmful, with the more harmful targeted forexecution and the less harmful for deportation to labor camps where theywould be reformed. During the Great T error, when Stalin and the Politburo ordered mass executions and deportations, the Soviet secretpolice relied upon these archival records of the population to know whomto arrest. The use of state violence to shape the population was thus predicated on a particular mapping of the politico-social body.
2
Holquist concludes that the Great T error under Stalin was an exten-
sion of the more general aspiration to sculpt society. He makes clear thatall Soviet leaders, including but not limited to Stalin, envisioned violenceas an essential means by which to progress toward communism. In theepigram of the original article from which this excerpt is taken, he quotesNikolai Bukharin, a Communist Party leader and eventual purge victim ofStalin, as writing, “Proletarian compulsion in all its forms, beginning withexecution by shooting and ending with the compulsory labor obligation,STATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 131
2For more on Soviet state violence and the increasing importance of ethnic categories
during and after the Second World War, see Weiner in this volume.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
is – however paradoxical this might sound – the means for producing a
Communist humanity from the human material of the capitalist epoch .”3
Stalinist terror, in this view, was not random violence, nor was it merely
the repression of potential opposition. Soviet leaders employed state vio-lence in an attempt to reshape society and indeed to refashion humannature itself.
Such a conclusion in no way endorses Stalinist terror. It does, however,
demonstrate that the conceptual and technological prerequisites forSoviet state violence went far beyond Stalin, Soviet society, or socialistideology. It suggests that our explanation of Stalinism must also take intoaccount modern conceptions of the social ﬁeld and modern state prac-tices of social intervention. Holquist’s article provides an excellent start-ing point for exploring these dimensions of Stalinism.
4132 PETER HOLQUIST
3The italicized portion was underlined by Lenin, who noted in the margin “Precisely!” N.
I. Bukharin, Problemy teorii i praktiki sotsializma (Moscow, 1989; original, 1920), pp. 168, 454.
4Holquist uses “totalitarianism” in his title, but his work is an example of post-revisionist
scholarship, not the totalitarian model. See the full version of his article, where he distin-guishes his use of the term from the Sovietological version of the totalitarian model.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
State Violence as T echnique: The Logic
of Violence in Soviet T otalitarianism
Peter Holquist
With the outpouring of materials from the Soviet archives, there has
been a tidal wave of literature on Soviet “repression.”1Yet scholars con-
tinue to treat such violence as an unintended consequence of the Sovietproject, as some unforeseen malfunctioning rather than the product ofits working out. Other than the “Stalin as evil genius” thesis, there nowexist two main schools on Soviet “Terror” among historians: it waseither the product of tensions, be they social or political;
2or it was 
the instrumental attempt to suppress opponents, real or imagined.3
Regardless of differences, most approaches based on new archival mate-rials share one common feature: they treat Soviet applications of vio-lence as purely repressive, however manic or irrational. Indeed, violenceis described as manic and irrational precisely because it so inexactly cor-responds to its supposed repressive function.
4As a result, actual
instances of applied violence are treated as a rupture or deviation froma supposedly more normal Soviet policy .
Soviet applications of state violence upon the politico-social body
were meticulously targeted and assiduously planned. To be sure, Sovietpower simultaneously strove to cultivate society and each individual init. But state violence was inextricably related to this desire to operateupon society as artifact. Dekulakization and the Great Terror were notinevitable products of either Marxism or even Bolshevism; but the Bolshevik aspiration to cultivate a socialist society , and as part of that,
1The best recent treatment is Oleg Khlevnyuk, “The Objectives of the Great Terror” in
Soviet History, 1917–1953: Essays in Honour of R. W . Davies , eds. Julian Cooper, Maureen
Perrie and E. A. Rees (New York, 1995); Alexander Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago ,
3 vols. (New York, 1974) is still valuable.
2J. Arch Getty , The Origins of the Great Purges (New York, 1985); Gabor Tamas 
Rittersporn, Stalinist Simpliﬁcations and Soviet Complications: Social Tensions and Political
Conﬂicts in the USSR (Philadelphia, 1991); Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives , eds. J. Arch
Getty and Roberta Manning (New York, 1993). For a critique of this approach, see OlegKhlevniuk, “Les mécanismes de la ‘Grand Terreur’ des années 1937–1938 au Turkménistan,” Cahiers du Monde russe 39, no. 1–2 (1998): 197–208, here at 197–98.
3Robert Thurston, Life and Terror in Stalin’s Russia, 1934–1941 (New Haven, 1995), esp.
pp. 58, 227.
4Many years ago, Hannah Arendt concluded that totalitarian terror “has ceased to be
a mere means for the suppression of opposition, though it is also used for such purposes”(Origins of Totalitarianism [New York, 1973], p. 464).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
to cultivate each individual, envisioned violence. While its intensity
varied, the use of violence in this way was not limited to the 1930s, butdates back to the founding of the regime.
5That is, Soviet state violence
was not simply repressive. It was employed as a tool for fashioning anidealized image of a better, purer society . After Shklovsky’s seminal1915–16 essay on formalist art, Soviet policies might best be describedas “state violence as technique.”
6In the Soviet Union, as throughout
Europe, technique – “the effective management of resources, bothnatural and human” – had become “a value and an aesthetic goal, notmerely as a means to an end.”
7
To be sure, the Soviet state used violence to excise [ iz”iat’ ] those indi-
viduals it had determined to be “socially harmful.” It did so, however,not merely to ensure society’s health and integrity , but equally to realizean idealized, fundamentally aesthetic image of society and each indi-vidual in it.
8As Peter Fritzsche has noted for the Nazi project, National
Socialism’s “constructive program of national health was accompaniedby a stern eugenics administration that sought progressively to weed outalleged biological dangers to the German Volk. From the very beginning,the regime applied measures to identify , segregate and eradicate debili-tating or supposedly foreign matter.” But one cannot appreciate the fullnature of this project unless one also grasps “the fantastic vision of theNational Socialists ...A  useful way of thinking about the links between
the administration of modern reform and the extraordinary measuresof National Socialism is to consider modernism in aesthetic terms.”
9To134 PETER HOLQUIST
5Along somewhat different lines, see Stefan Plaggenborg, “Gewalt und Militanz in 
Sowjetrussland, 1917–1930,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas 44, no. 3 (1996):
409–30; for the Soviet postwar use of violence, see Amir Weiner’s contribution to thisvolume.
6V . Shklovsky , “Iskusstvo kak priëm” in Sbornik po teorii poeticheskogo iazyka (St. 
Petersburg, 1917). See the excellent treatment in Katerina Clark, Petersburg: Crucible of
Cultural Revolution (Cambridge, 1995), pp. 32–4.
7Modris Eksteins, Rites of Spring (New York, 1989), p. 70.
8Jochen Hellbeck, “Laboratories of the Soviet Self: Diaries from the Stalin Era” (Ph.D. 
dissertation, Columbia University , 1998) demonstrates this point; see also Katerina Clark,Petersburg ; Eric Naiman, Sex in Public: The Incarnation of Early Soviet Ideology (Princeton,
1997); Boris Groys, The Total Art of Stalinism (Princeton, 1992); and Vladislav Todorov , Red
Square, Black Square (Albany , 1995). For treatments of the simultaneity of the aesthetic
and technical in the German context, see Modris Ekstein’s Rites of Spring (Boston, 1989),
esp. pp. 315–31; Klaus Theweleit, Male Fantasies , 2 vols., translated by Erica Carter,
Stephen Conway and Chris Turner (Minneapolis, 1987–9), esp. 2: 197–206; David G.Horn, Social Bodies: Science, Reproduction, and Italian Modernity (Princeton, 1994).
9Peter Fritzsche, “Nazi Modern,” MODERNISM/Modernity 3:1 (1996): 1–21, here
8–10. For other expressions of the fantastic and aesthetic as part of the National Social-ist program, see Eksteins, Rites of Spring , pp. 303–4 and Saul Friedländer, Nazi German
and the Jews, 1933–1939 (New York, 1997), pp. 86–7.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
emphasize this underlying aesthetic project in the Soviet case, I have
chosen Shklovsky’s term “technique” rather than a more technical termlike “scalpel” for Soviet state violence.
The Emergence of State Violence as T echnique
“ A great many of the practices we associate with the Revolution had 
had precedents in the treatment of the people by the government duringthe last two centuries of the monarchy . The old régime provided the Revolution with many of its methods; all the Revolution added was asavagery peculiar to itself.”
10Alexis de Tocqueville of course was speak-
ing of the French Revolution, yet his observation holds equally true forthe new Soviet regime emerging out of 1917. There is now a tendencyto displace all responsibility for the emergence of state violence onto Bolshevism as an ideology . But for its own ends, Bolshevism expandedupon existing practices. There were certainly speciﬁcities to Bolshevikapplications of violence. Yet the very possibility of applying state vio-lence to the politico-social body was predicated on two earlier develop-ments: the emergence over the course of the nineteenth century ofthe “social” as a realm for state intervention; and, the fashioning ofparticular tools for operating on this realm, particularly in the course of the First World War.
To conceive of a politico-social body upon which to operate, one ﬁrst
has to conceive of a polity in social terms. This was new in the nine-teenth century . The very term “social science” was not coined until theﬁrst years of the French Revolution. And this new way of seeing encom-passed both a model of science (thus allowing for the conviction that themethods of science are applicable to human affairs) and a deﬁnition ofthe social ﬁeld (providing a speciﬁc view of society and of the nature ofsocial processes to which the scientiﬁc model can be applied).
11This
social ﬁeld explicitly related the individual to the larger politico-socialbody . Emerging disciplines increasingly shifted from the traditionalimagery of a metaphoric relation between the individual body and thesocial body , to an argument that there existed an actual correlationSTATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 135
10Alexis de Tocqueville, The Old Regime and the French Revolution (New York, 1983), p.
192; see also Keith Michael Baker, “Representation” in The Political Culture of the Old
Regime , ed. Keith Baker (New York, 1986) and Roger Chartier, “The Chimera of Origins”
in Foucault and the Writing of History , ed. Jan Goldstein (Cambridge, MA, 1994).
11Keith Baker, Condorcet: from Natural Philosophy to Social Mathematics (Chicago, 1975),
p. x. On the rise of the social, see also Mary Poovey , Making a Social Body: British Cultural
Formation, 1830–1864 (Chicago, 1995); Jacques Donzelot, The Policing of Families (New
York, 1979); and, on a later period, David Horn, Social Bodies .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
between the two.12This binding of individuals to speciﬁc social cate-
gories contributed to the development of state measures to act on theseindividuals. The European state in the latter half of the nineteenthcentury devoted increasing attention to identifying and removing thesocial threat such individuals represented. Thus “a scientiﬁc approach
that included careful and constant documentation – or scientiﬁc obser-vation” was developed. “Evidently , the demands of bourgeois society forintellectual and moral ‘hygiene’ were inseparable from the practice ofviolent policing.”
13
As in the rest of Europe, the emergence of a social way of seeing
affected how the Russian Imperial state came to view and treat its pop-ulation. In particular, the discipline of military statistics emerged as oneof the essential conceptual models for conceiving of Imperial society .
14
Military statistics originated among reforming bureaucrats in the mid-nineteenth century and were modeled upon similar European studies.Military statistics transformed the Empire’s hitherto amorphous“people” [ narod ] into a well-deﬁned “population” [ naselenie ] through an
intensive statistical study of its inhabitants. And, of equal signiﬁcance,military statistics came to express an aesthetic preference (registered ina scientiﬁc language) for homogeneity . Thus even prior to the FirstWorld War the Imperial state was mapping the population in accordwith idealized images of the politico-social body . Military statistics con-stituted a particular social ﬁeld upon which the state could act.
Nor were these studies of merely academic interest. In the course 
of the First World War the Imperial state translated these modelings ofthe population into actual policies. The forced deportation of Jews,Germans, Balts and other groups from the western borderlands duringthe war merely transcribed into practice what military statistics hadbeen teaching for years.
15Some estimates place the total number of136 PETER HOLQUIST
12Catherine Gallagher, “The Body Versus the Social Body in the Works of Thomas
Malthus and Henry Mayhew,” Representations 14 (1986): 83–106. See also Ian Hacking,
“Biopower and the Avalanche of Printed Numbers,” Humanities in Society 5, no. 3–4
(1982): 279–95 and Joan Scott, “Statistical Representations of Work” in W ork in France ,
ed. Steven Kaplan and Cynthia Koepp (Ithaca, 1986).
13Alf Lüdtke, “The Permanence of Internal War,” in On the Road to Total War , ed. Stig
Förster and Jörg Nagler (Washington DC, 1997), here at 388–9; see also Robert Nye,Crime, Madness and Politics (Princeton, 1984).
14Alain Blum, “Oublier l’etat pour comprendre la Russie (XIXe–XXe siècles),” Revue des
Etudes slaves 66, no. 1 (1994): 135–45; on the signiﬁcance of military statistics, see Peter
Holquist, “To Count, To Extract, To Exterminate: Population Statistics and Population Politics in Late Imperial and Soviet Russia” in A State of Nations , eds. Terry Martin and
Ronald Grigor Suny (New York, 2001).
15On the deportations, see Eric Lohr, “Enemy Alien Politics in the Russian Empire during
World War One” (Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University , 1999); S. Nelipovich, “V
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
deportees at one million. During the First World War, the deportation of
unreliable elements simply became part of the conceptual landscape –a landscape that had been mapped by military statistics.
And the First World War practices of deportation preﬁgured many of
those identiﬁed as somehow intrinsically “Bolshevik.” Increasingly ,threats to the state were described in prophylactic terms: the Jewish“element” in the Western borderlands was “pernicious” [ zlovrednyi ] and
“harmful and dangerous for the Russian people.”
16(While different
adjectival modiﬁers were employed, the expression “an . . . element dan-
gerous to the . . . people” was the precise formula for later Soviet mass
operations.) After the May 1915 anti-German pogrom in Moscow, whencrowds had demanded the expulsion of all Imperial subjects of Germanbackground, the appointed head of the city expressed regret that therewere simply too many German subjects to ﬁt them in a concentrationcamp [ sic] on an island in the Volga.
17Punitive detachments, which
were to become ubiquitous in all armies during the Russian Civil War,operated extensively during the 1916 Steppe uprising. The Imperialstate in its total war manifestation thus elaborated an entire repertoireof practices for managing and operating upon the population, practicesthat were to be carried across the revolutionary divide.
18
The First World War therefore represents a crucial watershed, as the
Imperial state moved to fashion its vision of a body politic as much byexcision as by acculturation. The First World War did not introduce suchaspirations. Military statistics (and Russian colonial policy) had longsuggested such “solutions” were possible. But total war was the contextwithin which these practices emerged as a regular part of state policies.STATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 137
poiskakh ‘vnutrennego vraga’: deportatsionnaia politika Rossii (1914–1917)” in Pervaia
mirovaia voina i uchastie v nei Rossii (1914–1918) , 2 vols. (Moscow, 1994); Daniel Graf,
“Military Rule behind the Russian Front,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas 22, no. 3
(1974): 390–411; Mark von Hagen, “The Great War and the Mobilization of Ethnicity”in Post-Soviet Political Order , ed. Barnett Rubin and Jack Snyder (New York, 1998). For
documents, see “Dokumenty o presledovanii evreev ,” Arkhiv russkoi revoliutsii 19 (1928):
245–84.
16On measures during the course of the First World War to protect Imperial forces from
“harmful actions by the Jewish population,” including the taking of hostages and massdeportations, see “Dokumenty o presledovanii evreev ,” pp. 248, 250–1, 256–8, 275(Jews described as a “pernicious element”). See also The Jews of the Eastern War Zone (New
York, 1916); and Evakuatsiia i rekvizitsiia: spravochnik deistvuiushchikh uzakonenii i raspo-
razhenii (Petrograd, 1916), pp. 99–102 for the 3 August 1914 instruction sanctioning
hostage-taking in order to facilitate requisitioning in the war zone.
17Nikolai Kharlamov , “Izbienie v pervoprestolnoi: nemetskii pogrom v Moskve v mae
1915,” Rodina 1993, no. 8/9: 127–32; also Iu. Kir’ianov , “ ‘Maiskie bezporiadki’ 1915
g. v Moskve,” V oprosy istorii 1994, no. 12: 137–50.
18Peter Holquist, “ ‘Information is the Alpha and Omega of Our Work,’ ” Journal of
Modern History 69, no. 3 (1997): 415–50 and “To Count.”
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In this environment, the appeal of scientiﬁstic solutions intertwined
with an ethos of violence.19
In this light, the violence of the Russian Civil War appears not as
something sui generis but rather as an expansion of state violence ﬁrst
massively employed in the Great War. Sharing a common conceptualmatrix for population politics and emerging from the experience of totalwar, Whites just as much as Reds reﬂexively disaggregated the popula-tion into “elements” of varying reliability .
20They then employed a pro-
phylactics of violence on those elements deemed to be malignant orharmful. Whites termed Jews “microbes” or “bacilli”; Bolshevism waspresented as “a social disease.” And, pace many existing treatments, this
violence was not ‘wild’ but very well-structured: White commanderssifted their POWs, selecting out the undesirables and having them exe-cuted in groups later, a process the Whites described as “ﬁltering.”
21The
Bolshevik application of state violence had its own speciﬁcities; but itwas hardly unique.
Soviet State Violence as Prophylactics
So the preconditions for the application of violence to the politico-social
body predated the Bolshevik regime. But the Soviets then employed violence as technique to fashion society in their own image. And theSoviet state did so as an explicitly ideological regime.
22One can discern
the Soviet state’s constant devotion to the sculpting of its raw, humanmaterial, a project diligently pursued even in the years preceding thebetter known violence of the 1930s. Seen from this vantage point, themeasures of the 1930s are not some anomaly or deviation, but only the largest and most ambitious effort in a project stretching back to 1917.
From the very ﬁrst, the Soviet regime sought to rework the politico-
social body . In 1919, in the midst of a Civil War for its very existence, the138 PETER HOLQUIST
19On the First World War as creating a culture of violence in Russia, see Gorky , Untimely
Thoughts , pp. 9–12, 76–7, 128–30, 185, 195–9 (1917–18); Leon Trotsky , Terrorism and
Communism (Ann Arbor, 1961; original, 1920), pp. 65–8; Plaggenborg, “Gewalt”; and
Roger Pethybridge, The Social Prelude to Stalinism (New York, 1974), ch. 3.
20Peter Holquist, “Research Note: Anti-Soviet Svodki from the Civil War,” Russian Review
56, no. 3 (1997): 445–50.
21Peter Kenez, “Pogroms and White Ideology in the Russian Civil War” in Pogroms and
Anti-Jewish Violence in Modern Russian History , eds. John Klier and Shlomo Lambroza
(New York, 1992); A. L. Litvin, “Krasnyi i belyi terror v Rossii, 1917–1922,” Otechestvennaia istoriia 1993, no. 6: 46–62; E. I. Dostovalov , “O belykh i belom terrore,”
Rossiiskii arkhiv , vol. 6 (1995): 637–97, “ﬁltering” at 678.
22David Hoffmann, “European Modernity and Soviet Socialism” in Russian Modernity:
Politics, Knowledge, Practices , eds. David Hoffmann and Yanni Kotsonis (New York, 2000);
Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain , excerpted in this volume.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Soviet state engaged in a policy of ’de-Cossackization.”23This attempt to
remove an entire segment of the population (the term employed againwas “element”) was not a defensive reaction to a hostile group butinstead an attempt to foster an idealized image of the politico-social bodyby excising those ‘elements’ determined to be harmful. In a policy review,Reingol’d, a senior Party member, summed up the means and ends of de-Cossackization. Its goal had been “to make the Don healthy” [ Don
ozdorovit’ ]. To this end, Reingol’d suggested that the Soviet state “will
sooner or later have to exterminate, simply physically destroy the vastportion of Cossacks.”
24The Party decree delineating this policy explicitly
called for the instrumental use of “mass terror” and the outright andtotal “extermination” of the Cossack elite. As a direct consequence ofthis decree, upwards of ten thousand people were judicially executed.
Yet within several months de-Cossackization was abjured and the
Cossacks became normalized as a component part of the Soviet popu-lation. This abrupt shift in policy has several lessons. First, while theessentialization of socio-political categories was a critical preconditionfor de-Cossackization, so too was the role played by political authoritieswho had sanctioned and pressed de-Cossackization. As Detlev Peukert has argued, the principle of selection and even elimination hadlong been present in scientiﬁc thought. But measures such as de-Cossackization became possible only when states – especially ones pur-suing an explicitly ideological agenda – endorse one single branch ofmodern social thought, and grant it supreme state backing.
25De-
Cossackization was not so much the product of scientiﬁc models them-selves, but the result of an ideological system extending scientiﬁstic rea-soning as a universal template for dealing with perceived threats. Theabrupt shift in policy towards Cossacks also demonstrates that what wasimportant was not the category itself but a framework that sought toidentify opposition in terms of malignancies to be removed in order tobring about the healthy , pristine and beautiful society . De-Cossackiza-tion was not an anomalous event but represented a Soviet propensityfor fashioning visions of society by subtraction as much as by addition.
26
Periods when the regime resorted to such measures were not deviationsbut those conjunctures when it thought it possible or necessary to actSTATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 139
23Peter Holquist, “ ‘Conduct Merciless, Mass Terror’: Decossackization on the Don, 1919,”
Cahiers du Monde russe 38, no. 1–2 (1997): 127–62.
24I. I. Reingol’d to the CC, “Dokladnaia zapiska” in Bol’shevistkoe rukovodstvo: perepiska,
1912–1927 (Moscow, 1997), pp. 107–10.
25Peukert, “Genesis.” Nye ( Crime , pp. xi, 67–73) makes a similar observation about ideas
of degeneracy in France.
26The Soviets were quite explicit about this: for a postwar recapitulation of this point,
see G. Glezerman, “Likvidatsiia eksplutatorskikh klassov v SSSR” in O sovetskom sotialis-
ticheskom obshchestve , eds. F . Konstantinov , M. Kammari, G. Glezerman (Moscow, 1948).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
on a long-standing goal – to create a socialist society through manag-
ing and sculpting its human as well as its raw materials.
This project of politico-social fashioning even framed the conduct of
military campaigns in the midst of the Civil War. Soviet anti-insurgencycampaigns in the Don region in 1920–1 and against the Antonov movement in Tambov province in 1921 aimed as much at operatingupon the politico-social body as at smashing military opposition.
27
Existing treatments merely portray Soviet anti-insurgent policies asrepressive measures intended to eliminate political threats. In fact, thecampaigns aimed at much more. Soviet forces did not seek to “pacify thepeople” [ usmirit’ narod ] or “suppress the insurgency” [ podavit’ vosstanie ].
Soviet measures sought instead “to remove and eliminate the banditelement” [ iz”iat’ i istrebit’ banditskii element ] and “to cleanse those
regions infected by banditism” [ ochistit’ raiony zarazhennye banditiz-
mom ].
28That is, they did not seek simply to pacify the countryside and
enforce obedience. “Banditism” (described variously as “a dangerousepidemic” and “a psychological illness”) was merely a symptom point-ing to the presence of malignant and dangerous elements. The goal wasto remove such tumors, whether they be active or benign: once thesymptom of banditism revealed the presence of dangerous elements,cleansing was required whether the insurgency itself had continued or not.
Deﬁning its task as excising malignant elements from the population
led the Soviet state to apply different measures than if the goal hadsimply been to enforce obedience and order upon a territory . The goalwas not just to secure obedience and order, but explicitly “to cleanse”[ochishchenie, chistka, ochistit’ ] the population of pernicious threats, to
secure its full health and recovery [ polnoe ozdorovlenie ]. It is in this light
that one must see Soviet orders insisting that “we must strive by allmeans at our disposal: (1) to capture all those individuals who have par-ticipated directly in bands and to capture those who have offered any aidto individual bands, and (2) then mercilessly eliminate a portion of themand settle the remainder beyond the boundaries of the territory”; or to140 PETER HOLQUIST
27This point is treated in greater-detail in Holquist “To Count.” Such campaigns share
some features of later Nazi ‘cleansing operations’ [ Säuberungsunternehmen ] in the 
Second World War: see Omer Bartov , The Eastern Front: German Troops and the Barbariza-
tion of Warfare (New York, 1986) and Mark Mazower, Inside Hitler’s Greece (New Haven,
1993).
28For the Don in 1921, see Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi voennyi arkhiv [RGV A], f. 25896,
op. 1, d. 8, ll. 2–12, 15 (yearly report of Don Military assembly to combat banditism and report of local plenipotentiary); for the Soviet anti-insurgency campaign againstAntonov , see Antonovshchina: dokumenty i materialy , ed. Viktor Danilov (Tambov , 
1994).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
execute all insurgents except the lowest rank and ﬁle, who were to be
exiled from “infected” regions with their families.29Thus the goal of
these anti-insurgency measures was not simply to pacify territories, butto secure the proper condition of the population either by physicallyremoving or simply exterminating “harmful elements.” And similarpolicies, albeit at a lower intensity , continued to be conducted through-out the supposedly benign NEP years of the 1920s.
30
The drive to identify and then to remove “harmful elements” was not
limited to anti-bandit operations. As Soviet forces prepared in 1920 tostorm the last stronghold of the Whites in the Crimea, Stalin informedTrotsky that an order would soon be issued directing the “total exter-mination of the Wrangelite ofﬁcer corps.” After the Red Army had seizedthis last base of the White movement, Soviet authorities secretlyawarded one Bolshevik ‘hygienist’ the Order of the Red Banner for (inthe words of the commendation) “having cleansed the Crimean penin-sula of White ofﬁcers and counter-intelligence agents who had been leftbehind, removing up to thirty governors, ﬁfty generals, more than threehundred colonels and as many counter-intelligence agents, for a total ofup to twelve thousand of the White element.”
31This frantic search for
the “ofﬁcer element” within the Soviet population would continue forseveral decades.
32
Nor was this process of “cleansing” limited to the ﬁelds of battle.
Indeed, “questions of purity plagued the Party throughout the mid-1920s and the battles for power within it were fought along a discursiveaxis preoccupied with corruption,” leading the Party to operate with aparticular “inoculatory logic.”
33At the close of the Civil War, Soviet
authorities pursued a systematic “ﬁltering” of unreliable elements fromthe population. As the military threat receded and NEP was being intro-duced, the Bolsheviks had dispatched all potentially harmful elementsto concentration camps. These camps cannot be understood merely asdetention points for suspects or holding-pens for enemies. For an explic-itly self-styled Marxist regime, they were a space where those who wereredeemable could be reformed through labor.
34But the camps servedSTATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 141
29RGV A, f. 25896, op. 1, d. 8, l. 15; Antonovshchina , 165–6, 172, 182, 187.
30Holquist, “To Count.”
31RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 109, d. 117, l. 4 (Trotskii to Stalin); Bol’shevitskoe rukovodstvo ,
p. 150 (Stalin to Trotskii); commendation as cited in Litvin, “Krasnyi i belyi terror,” pp.55–6.
32Solzhenitsyn, Gulag Archipelago , 1: 39, 77.
33Naiman, Sex in Public , p. 263; similarly , Clark, Petersburg , p. 211.
34On the emergence of the system of concentration camps, see Michael Jakobson,
Origins of the Gulag: the Soviet Prison Camp System, 1917–1934 (Lexington, KY , 1993)
and the documents in Revelations from the Russian Archives , eds. Diane Koenker and
Ronald Bachman (Washington, 1997), pp. 132–40.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
equally as a “ﬁlter,” a space where those who could be redeemed
through collective labor were separated out from those who were incor-rigible and resistant to labor’s ameliorative effects. Suspect elementswere removed from the general population while their true nature wasdetermined in the camps through a detailed hermeneutics of the self.Nor were these camps a minor affair. Orel province had four campsintended not only for compulsory labor but also for the ﬁltration ofsuspects. In the course of four months, over thirty-ﬁve thousand in-dividuals passed through Orel camp #l alone.
35The Moscow Cheka
devoted itself to “the massive work in ﬁltering out the enormousnumbers of White Guard prisoners,” processing twenty thousand Whiteofﬁcers just in the summer of 1920.
36
It is no exaggeration to describe the ﬁltration process as a detailed
hermeneutics of individual selves. All students at the (Soviet!) PetrogradNaval Academy were required to present themselves before a “ﬁltration”commission in August 1921.
37The commission interviewed each
person individually and then divided the entire academy into groups oftwenty-ﬁve. Andrei P . Belobrov was one of the elements to be ﬁltered.After the initial interview, his group was transported by train to Moscow .(Given the dismal state of Soviet transport at the time, the use of a train for this purpose represented a major resource allocation.) FromMoscow this group was then transferred (again, by train) to Vladimir-on-Kliazma, where the suspects were interred in a concentration camp.Three months later, after intermittent interrogations, Belobrov wastaken individually to Moscow, where he was photographed and ﬁnger-printed at the central secret police prison, the Lubianka. From there hewas deposited in a “political isolator” in Moscow, where he remaineduntil December. At that time he was again summoned to the Lubianka,where he was required to write a detailed autobiography , and againreturned to the “isolator.” He was summoned back to the Lubianka inFebruary 1922, where he was issued a slip instructing him to presenthimself to Red Fleet headquarters for further assignment. Belobrov had142 PETER HOLQUIST
35“Lageria prinuditel’nykh rabot na Orlovshchine v nachale 1920-kh godov ,” Rekviem
(Orel, 1995), vol. 2: 20–7.
36Dzerzhinsky to Lenin in The Unknown Lenin , ed. Richard Pipes (New Haven, 1996), 
pp. 119–21; on the Moscow camps, see also Revelations from the Russian Archives , pp.
134–8.
37This account based on A. P . Belobrov , “Kak bol’sheviki ‘ﬁl’trovali’ ﬂotskikh oﬁt-
serov ,” Istochnik 1996, no. 3: 64–81. On the place of autobiographies in Bolshevik
hermeneutics, see Igal Halﬁn’s “From Darkness to Light: Student Communist Autobi-ographies in the 1920s,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas 45, no. 2 (1997): 210–36;
and Igal Halﬁn, Class, Consciousness, and Salvation in Revolutionary Russia (Pittsburgh,
1999).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
successfully passed through the “ﬁltration.” The entire process of
hermeneutic probing so as to determine the true nature of this one manhad required six months.
Belobrov was fortunate to emerge from the process of ﬁltration. With
the Civil War already won, the regime was busy discarding all that hadbeen trapped by its politico-social ﬁlters. In early 1920, the Soviets cap-tured and “ﬁltered” Vasilii Khripunov and his two sons, all three ofwhom had served as ofﬁcers in the anti-Soviet Don Army . The Sovietsexecuted Vasilii but dispatched his two sons, via Ekaterinodar andMoscow, to a concentration camp in Tula, from whence they were soonreleased. (However, due to this blemish in their records, both Vasilii’ssons were executed in 1937.)
38
One of the most revealing accounts on “ﬁltration” comes from
comrade Rychkov , the head of the Tambov concentration camp, to a July1921 closed gathering of Party members who had just participated insuppressing the Antonov insurgency .
39Rychkov insisted that “we must
reeducate [the former ‘bandits’] so that we can release them as con-scious individuals.” Other Party members chided him for coddling hischarges by setting up plays and choral societies, and demanded insteadthat “one should eliminate the enem y... shoot them – period!”
Rychkov responded:
That is an entirely incorrect error, we’ve heard it repeatedly . It wouldn’t
take long to shoot them – unlike the bandits, we’d have enough car-tridges. But to turn our recent, inveterate enemies into good, strongfriends – that’s what we need to do. Of course, if any barons or otherwealthy sorts ended up there, they’d soon be a head shorter. Also, if afervent, murdering bandit does not respond to political enlightenment,insists on his own way , his song won’t last very long. But we must havean absolutely different approach for those who fell into error and deeplyrepent. Not for nothing did we, on orders from above, release an entireechelon back to their homes. ...N o ,  w e  destroy some, others – those who
are able – we reeducate, turn to our side. Such are the conclusions we’vecome to in our camp.STATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 143
38“Kazach’ia sem’ia Khripunovykh: vospominaniia E. V . Kalabinoi,” V oprosy istorii
1996, no. 11–12: 73–86. For orders that captured ofﬁcers are to be processed ﬁrst by“special departments” and then dispatched to concentration camps, see Rezoliutsii i
postanovleniia vtorogo donskogo s”ezda sovetov (Rostov , 1920), pp. 19–20; Prikazy sovetskim
voiskam 9-oi armii (n.p., [1920]), p. 340; Gosudarstvennyi arkhiv rostovskoi oblasti
[GARO], f. R-97, op. 1, d. 516, l. 36 (Don Cheka directive ordering all ofﬁcers to be heldin concentration camps in the far rear).
39“ ‘Sfotograﬁrovannye rechi’: govoriat uchastniki likvidatsii antonovshchiny ,” 
Otechestvennye arkhivy 1996, no. 2: 34–66.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Rychkov strenuously insisted on the camp’s corrective rather than
exclusively punitive functions before a closed Party gathering packedwith those demanding merciless vengeance. Yet his account also revealsthe obverse of this corrective policy: the camp was intended to winnowout those who were redeemable from those who were not. Thosedetainees determined to be incorrigible were slated for destruction (“we destroy some”). This policy was not limited to the Tambov camps.In March and April of 1921, just as the New Economic Policy was being introduced, over 540 ofﬁcers were executed in the Arkhangel’skconcentration camp alone.
40As a result of this assiduous ﬁltering 
one scholar estimates that Soviet power executed over twenty-ﬁve thousand people in the eighteen months following the end of the CivilWar.
41
These examples from the Civil War and early 1920s demonstrate 
that the project of fashioning society by excising particular “elements”was an intrinsic aspect of Soviet power from the very ﬁrst. To be sure, repression in the 1920s, during the New Economic Policy , wasobviously much different than repression in the later paroxysms ofinterwar state violence, most notably those of 1929–33 and 1937–8.Violence in these “hot” periods was distinct both in its extent and in itslethality . However, the violence during these years was not so much ananomaly in Soviet history , as those conjunctures of perceived politicaland geo-strategic crisis when the Soviet state massively extended thelogic of existing practices, overriding any previous constraints.
42Indeed,
violence during NEP , while not as extensive or lethal as earlier, duringthe Civil War, or in later instances, was nevertheless a prevalent featureof the time.
43
The better known and more widely practiced applications of state vio-
lence of the late 1920s and 1930s operated within the same conceptualframework, that of excising malignant “elements” in order to safeguardthe rest of society . Indeed, the arrests and executions in 1937–8 oftenproceeded according to lists drawn up during the 1920s, some as earlyas 1920–1. To be sure, in the later period the targeted “elements” com-prised a much larger portion of the population and the proportion of144 PETER HOLQUIST
40Iu. V . Doinykh, “Predshestvenniki Solovkov: novye arkhivnye svidetel’stva,” 
Otechestvennye arkhivy , 1994, no. 1: 76–80.
41This ﬁgure in Doinykh, p. 80.
42For the underlying logic of the terror of 1937–8, but with an analysis of the geo-
political conjuncture that made its particular unfolding possible, see Kotkin, Magnetic
Mountain , chapter 7.
43Solzhenitsyn, Gulag Archipelago , vol. 1, chapter 2; Nicolas Werth, “De la trêve au 
grand tournant” in Le livre noir du communism , ed. Stéphane Courtois et al. (Paris, 1997),
esp. pp. 150–5; S. A. Krasil’nikov , “Ssylka v 1920-e gody ,” Minuvshee , vol. 21 (Moscow-
St. Petersburg, 1997): 175–239.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
those deemed incorrigible (and hence subject to execution) was incom-
parably higher, particularly in 1937–8.44But the later policies repre-
sented the extension and expansion of preexisting ways of viewing andacting upon the politico-social body .
Seen in this light, the 1929–30 dekulakization campaign represents
no anomalous shift in Soviet policy , but rather the conjuncture whenthe regime sought to implement existing aspirations to practice “socialprophylaxis” (Solzhenitsyn) and “prophylactic cleansing” (Molotov).Soviet directives on dekulakization proclaimed the campaign’s goal to be “to cleanse the collective farms from kulak and other counter-revolutionary elements” and “to cleanse the farms of the elements that are infecting them.”
45The OGPU’s 15 March 1931 “Memorandum
on conducting the mass expulsion of dekulakized peasants” statedforthrightly that the goal of deportation from all regions was “ to totally
cleanse [them] of kulaks ” [emphasis in original].
46And the measures 
used to secure dekulakization replicated those employed earlier in de-Cossackization and especially in anti-bandit operations. Indeed, one can view dekulakization as an all-encompassing, Union-wide anti-bandit operation.
47As with the earlier bandit and counterrevolutionary
“elements,” kulak elements were identiﬁed within the general popula-tion and then further disaggregated into the more and the less harmful.The February 2, 1930 OGPU directive #4421 on dekulakization identi-ﬁed two categories of kulak and sanctioned different measures for eachgroup. As in earlier anti-bandit operations, the most harmful categorywas to be “immediately liquidated.” Soviet activists declared that “Wewill exile the kulak by the thousands and when necessary – shoot thekulak breed”; “we will make soap of the kulaks”; and “Our class enemymust be wiped off the face of the earth.” This was not mere rhetoric.More than 20,000 individuals were sentenced to death in 1930 alone,and this ﬁgure covers only those tried by the OGPU.
48The remaining,
“less harmful” category was deported from their home regions, whetherSTATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 145
44See V . N. Zemskov , “Zakliuchennye v 30-e gody: demograﬁcheskii aspekt,” 
Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniia 1996, no. 7: 3–14.
45These examples from the Smolensk Archive, WKP 166, ll. 3–5, 30–8; for similar doc-
uments on the Poles’e and the Khar’kov regions, see Revelations from the Russian Archives ,
pp. 402, 416. On the dekulakization campaign, see Lynne Viola, Peasant Rebels Under
Stalin (Oxford, 1997).
46N. Ia. Gushchin, ‘Raskulachivanie’ v Sibiri (1928–1934) (Novosibirsk, 1996), pp.
111–12.
47Holquist, “To Count”; Viola, Peasant Rebels , pp. 175–9; and the language employed in
the OGPU directive #4421 (see following note).
48OGPU directive #4421 in Neizvestnaia Rossiia , vol. 1 (Moscow, 1992), pp. 237–45;
quotations from Viola, Peasant Rebels , p. 37; ﬁgure on sentences, O. V . Khlevniuk, 
Politbiuro (Moscow, 1996), p. 19.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
merely from their districts or to distant “corrective-labor colonies” and
“special settlements.” And when they arrived at their places of deten-tion, kulaks were again ﬁltered. Immediately upon their arrival in Magnitogorsk, dekulakized peasants “were interviewed extensively fortheir biography , which was thought to be an indication of the degree ofdanger they posed.”
49
Thus the Soviet state’s massive employment of violence in 1937–8,
frequently termed the “Great Terror,” can be viewed as expanding uponexisting aspirations and even practices. The infamous Soviet “mass oper-ations” of this period were again directed against “elements,” this time“anti-Soviet,” “counter-revolutionary” and “socially alien.” As geopo-litical tensions increased and Bolshevik eschatology pointed towards the“ﬁnal, decisive struggle” promised by the International (sung ritualisti-
cally at Party gatherings), the February–March 1937 Party plenumdevoted particular attention to the supposed presence of a great numberof “anti-Soviet elements” in the politico-social body .
50Consequently , the
Politburo passed the 2 July 1937 resolution “Concerning Anti-SovietElements,” a concern directly addressed by NKVD order #00447 of 30July 1937.
51This order, framing the most massive of the “mass opera-
tions,” listed nine target populations (e.g., former kulaks, socially alienelements, former members of anti-Soviet parties, former priests, recidi-vist criminals) and divided them into two categories: “to the ﬁrst cate-gory belong all of the most hostile of these elements. They are to besubject to immediate arrest and are to be shot upon examination. ...t o
the second category belong the remaining less active but neverthelesshostile elements. They are subject to immediate arrest and detention incamps for a period of 8–10 years, and the most malicious and sociallydangerous are to be held in prisons for that period.” NKVD Order#00447 speciﬁed regional quotas for each category , decreeing 259,450arrests, of whom 72,950 were to be shot, a total comprising well over146 PETER HOLQUIST
49Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain , p. 217; on the kulak “special settlers,” see the documen-
tary publication Spetspereselentsy v zapadnoi sibiri , 3 vols. (Novosibirsk, 1992–3).
50For the reports at this plenum, see V oprosy istorii , nos. 5–6 (1993). On how the geopo-
litical situation played into the Terror, see Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain , pp. 303, 310,
319–20, 334, 337; on how Bolshevik eschatology contributed to the dynamic, seeHalﬁn, “From Darkness to Light” and Class, Consciousness and Salvation , as well as
Stephen Hanson, Time and Revolution (Chapel Hill, 1997), pp. 166–70.
51For the Central Committee resolution and NKVD order #00447, see Trud , 4 June
1992; for increases in the arrest and execution target ﬁgures, see Izvestiia , 3 April 1996,
p. 5. For the conduct of this operation in two regions, see Oleg Khlevniuk, “Les mécan-ismes de la ‘Grand Terreur’ des années 1937–1938 au Turkménistan,” Cahiers du Monde
russe 39, no. 1–2 (1998): 197–208, and Leningradskii martirolog , vol. 1 (Sankt-Peterburg,
1995), pp. 38–48.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ten percent of all those executed during 1937–8. And the regional list
was incomplete, since the quotas omitted a number of regions. In anycase, from late August to mid-December 1937 the Politburo, at therequest of local authorities, sanctioned increases in the totals for exe-cution by a further 16,800 people.
52
As should now be clear, the oft-drawn distinction between “purges”
[chistki ] as a purely administrative practice limited to Party members
and a “Terror” that swirled among the general populace only in 1937–8is untenable.
53Indeed, the very term “terror” seems not to have been
employed by the historical actors at the time. (Not that Bolsheviks wereopposed to the term: they employed it self-consciously and extensivelyin the Civil War). Instead, the Soviets proclaimed that they were “cleans-ing” society , protecting it through the use of the “supreme measure ofsocial defense” – execution. Thus the various Party “purges” were onlyone aspect of the overarching drive to cleanse the entire politico-socialbody , both within the Party as well as outside it. Indeed, the vast majority of victims in the years 1937–8 were not Party members orstate ofﬁcials.
54
The argument that Bolshevik applications of state violence sought to
eliminate classes but not people is clearly wrong. Soviet attempts to elim-inate classes meant the very real, intentional and physical eliminationof individuals. While their category was primarily class, Marxists toospoke of degeneracy and the need to improve the population.
55But the
Soviet project was not simply to excise and eliminate; it was to do so inorder to realize an idealized image of the politico-social body , of “thePeople-as-One.”
56How did the Soviets know what that was to be, and
who did and did not belong?STATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 147
52Moskovskie novosti , 21 June 1992; also Izvestiia , 3 April 1996. The number of victims
of this operation certainly exceeded its ofﬁcial ‘limits’ (Khlevniuk, “Les mécanismes,” pp.202–4).
53E.g., J. Arch Getty , The Origins of the Great Purge ; contra this, see Solzhenitsyn, Gulag
Archipelago , 1: 70.
54For instance, 96% of the victims in the Tomsk region did not belong to the Party 
(V . N. Uimanov , Repressii: kak eto bylo [Tomsk, 1995], pp. 50–1). However Zemskov 
(“Zakliuchennye,” p. 8) notes that such ﬁgures did not include those who had earlier been expelled from the Party . Undoubtedly , Party members suffered disproportionately inthe Terror. The point, however, is that violence was not circumscribed to the Party .
55On German and Russian Marxists’ fascination with eugenics, see Loren Graham,
“Science and Values: the Eugenics Movement in Germany and Russia in the 1920s,”American Historical Review 82, no. 5 (1977): 1133–64. Both Eric Naiman ( Sex in Public )
and Halﬁn ( Class, Consciousness and Salvation ) deal extensively with Soviet notions of
degeneracy .
56See Claude Lefort, “The Image of the Body in Totalitarianism,” in Lefort, The Political
Forms of Modern Society , ed. John Thompson (Cambridge, 1986).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The Human Archive: Of Each and All
“Two new devices for political organization and rule over foreign peoples
were discovered during the ﬁrst decades of imperialism. One was race asa principle of the body politic, and the other bureaucracy as a principleof foreign domination. . . . Both discoveries were actually made on the
dark continent.”
57Arendt’s observation has been solidly demonstrated
by a wealth of literature on colonial rule and domination.58Such “colo-
nial” techniques then became embedded within the practices of the colonizing states and became increasingly deployed within Europe aswell.
59
Race, however, is not the only all-encompassing macro-category
through which populations can be refracted. Class is another axis foraligning and explaining the social world, and it too purports to univer-sal truth. Both nationalism and socialism can thus be seen to be theplaying out of a more general tendency to homogenize polities, one ona national, the other on a class axis. If race and bureaucracy came pow-erfully together in the nineteenth century in the Dark Continent andIndia, in the twentieth century class and bureaucracy intertwined onthe Eurasian land mass, in the Soviet Union.
60The social ﬁeld had
emerged in the nineteenth century; in the early twentieth century , astate for the ﬁrst time sought to catalogue and then act upon a speciﬁ-cally socialist vision of it.
Using the prism of Marxist analysis, the Soviet regime attempted to
map its politico-social body in toto and situate every single individual
component part of it. In so doing, the Soviet state sought not only tocompile a vast human archive, but then to act upon its human mater-ial (again, in aggregate and individually).
61These practices strove to
make the individual and the collective politico-social body intersect –148 PETER HOLQUIST
57Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (New York, 1951), p. 185.
58Among a vast literature, see Pradeep Barua, “Inventing Race: the British and India’s
Martial Races,” The Historian 58, no. 1 (1995): 107–16; David Ludden, “Orientalist
Empiricism: transformations of colonial knowledge” in Orientalism and the Postcolonial
Predicament , ed. Carol Breckenridge and Peter van der Veer (Philadelphia, 1993); 
Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities , expanded edition (New York, 1991); 
Bernard Cohn, “The Census, Social Stratiﬁcation and Objectiﬁcation in South Asia,” inAn Anthropologist among the Historians (New Delhi, 1987).
59Sven Lindqvist, ‘Exterminate All the Brutes!’ (New York, 1996); Isabel Hull, “German
Final Solutions in the Wilhelmine Period” (unpublished manuscript); Fran Hirsch, “ AnEmpire of Nations” (Ph. D. thesis, Princeton University , 1998); Holquist, “To Count.”
60Hirsch (“ An Empire of Nations”) presents Soviet measures as self-conscious attempt
to implement “colonial models” of rule.
61Programmy statisticheskikh kursov raionnykh i guberskikh (Moscow, 1920), pp. 10–11;
Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain , pp. 94–105.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
here was the place where “People-as-One” was forged out of concrete
individuals. But in this attempt to correlate an increasing individual-ization with the reinforcement of totality , the Soviet project is not someanomaly , but rather a particular playing out of the principles of modernpolitical rationality .
62
Through its censuses, through discriminatory legislation, through its
ubiquitous detailed questionnaires, the Soviet state sought to know andorder the world.
63And this world was sculpted along the lines of Marxist
analysis. From the very ﬁrst years of the regime, authorities determinedeach and every person’s “social background” and on this basis assignedthem a place in their ordering of the politico-social body .
64The censuses
of 1926, 1937 and 1939 – each accompanied by a press campaign pro-moting it as an event of vital politico-social importance – delineated theboundaries and constitution of the socialist polity , a polity constitutedby its individual component parts (hence the census).
65
The “passportization” of the population was the most intrusive and
effective device for cataloguing the population and impressing uponeach and every individual their proper station within the newly-emerging socialist society . In the midst of the Civil War, EmmanuilEnchmen had (in a pamphlet published under Party auspices) proposedthat “the communist society of the future will be founded on a systemof ‘physiological passports’ for all human organisms,” which were toserve simultaneously as a type of ration card for consumption and todetermine the amount of joy its holder was to have.
66While Enchmen’s
proposal for physiological passports now strikes us as bizarre, GermanSTATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 149
62Michel Foucault, “The Political Technology of Individuals” in Technologies of the Self ,
ed. Luther Martin, Huch Gutman and Partick Hutton (Amherst, 1988) and Keith Baker,“ A Foucauldian French Revolution” in Foucault and the Writing of History , ed. Jan 
Goldstein. For how Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy situated the individuals within apolitico-social matrix, see Götz Aly and Karl Heinz Roth, Die restlose Erfassung: V olkzählen,
Identiﬁzieren und Aussondern im Nationalsozialisimus (Berlin, 1984); Horn, Social Bodies ;
and Carl Ipsen, Dictating Demography: the Problem of Population in Fascist Italy (New York,
1996).
63Sheila Fitzpatrick, “ Ascribing Class: the Construction of Social Identity in Soviet
Russia,” Journal of Modern History 65, no. 4 (1993): 745–70.
64Fitzpatrick, “ Ascrbing Class” and Elise Kimerling, “Civil Rights and Social Policy in
Soviet Russia, 1918–1936,” Russian Review 41, no. 1 (1982): 24–46.
65V . B. Zhiromskaia, “Vsesoiznye perepisi naseleniia 1926, 1937, 1939 godov ,” Istoriia
SSSR 1990, no. 3: 84–104; Catherine Merridale, “The 1937 Census and the Limits of
Stalinist Rule,” The Historical Journal 39, no. 1 (1996): 225–40; and Francine Hirsch,
“Ethnographers, Statisticians and the Making of the Soviet Union,” Slavic Review 56, no.
2 (1997): 251–78. National Socialist censuses likewise had a constructivist agenda; Nazistatisticians described their task as “deutsche Aufbauwerk” (Aly and Roth, Die restlose 
Erfassung , p. 8).
66Cited in Naiman, Sex in Public , p. 76.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
health ofﬁcials in the early 1920s actually instituted a system of “health
passports” and worked on “psycho-biograms” for relating the popula-tion’s physical and mental qualities.
67And while Bukharin criticized
Enchman’s proposal as excessively biologistic, Bukharin himself (elabo-rating on August Bebel and European socialist thought in general)entertained plans in the same period for statistical bureaus to regulatethe work of everybody in the new socialist state.
68In the course of the
Civil War the Soviet state implemented a form of passport system – laborbooks – that encompassed aspects of both Enchmen’s passport ideal andBukharin’s enthusiasm for work bureaus.
69
Labor books passed with the end of the Civil War. It was not until
1932 that the Soviet state moved to realize a more total “passportiza-tion” of the population. Scholars have noted that a primary object ofpassportization was the regime’s desire, in the wake of collectivizationand the ensuing famine, to keep starving peasants on the land and outof the cities.
70Alongside this task, the passport legislation was explicitly
intended “to cleanse” the newly-emerging socialist spaces (new cities,constructions sites, worker dormitories) by distinguishing authentic cit-izens from those elements polluting the pristine new areas. The decreesetting out the new passport system justiﬁed its introduction by invok-ing the need “to cleanse these populated points from kulak, criminal andother anti-Bolshevik elements who are hiding there.” An accompany-ing editorial elaborated that a major goal was “to cleanse, to deport theseparasitic elements from our cities, building areas, and workers’ settle-ments” and that “the passport system is designed to help the immediatecleansing of these anti-Bolshevik elements from the cities.”
71And it was
in precisely these terms that Soviet citizens understood passportization.As passports were introduced to Moscow, Stepan Podlubnyi, the son ofa dekulakized peasant who had moved from Ukraine to Moscow underfalse documents, conﬁded to his diary that only a miracle could save him from identiﬁcation and expulsion. Yet he commented with evidentapproval that “not only institutions, but also the population follows thiswork with suspense . . . All in all, [passportization] is a sorting out, the150 PETER HOLQUIST
67Paul Weindling, Health, Race and German Politics between Uniﬁcation and Nazism,
1870–1945 (Cambridge, 1993), pp. 384–85.
68Naiman, Sex in Public , p. 77 for Bukharin’s critique of Enchmen; Lars Lih, “The
Mystery of the ABC ,” Slavic Review 56, no. 1 (1997): 50–72, Bukharin’s enthusiasm for
statistical bureaus at 53–4.
69Mervyn Matthews, The Passport Society (Boulder CO, 1993), pp. 16–19.
70Sheila Fitzpatrick, Stalin’s Peasants (New York, 1994), pp. 92–5.
71Pravda , 28 December 1932. See also Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain , pp. 99–101 and V . P .
Popov , “Pasportnaia sistema v SSSR (1932–1976),” Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniia 1995,
nos. 8–9, who argues that the Soviet passport system differed fundamentally from its pre-revolutionary predecessor (no. 9, p. 5).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
newest model of a human cleansing machine” [ v obshchem, sortirovka,
liudechistil’ka noveishei konstruktsii ]. (Despite his reservations, Podlubnyi
survived this round of “sorting,” although the OGPU soon after revealedthat it knew of his true background).
72
As Podlubnyi himself suggested, passportization was intended to
identify “socially harmful and socially dangerous elements” and to facilitate their surreptitious marking and excision. The governmentestablished secret bureaus, the purpose of which was to register “thekulak, criminal and all other anti-bolshevik elements” and aid in theirremoval.
73According to records of the militia, more than 6.6 million
passports had been issued in Moscow and ten other major cities throughApril 1933. Yet another 265,000 people had been denied passports,among whom the militia had identiﬁed over 67,000 “kulaks in ﬂightand dekulakized individuals”; nearly 22,000 individuals whose civicrights had been revoked [ lishentsy ]; and 34,800 individuals “not occu-
pied in socially useful labor” – all of whom were subsequently subject to expulsion.
74By 1934, passportization had encompassed more than
twenty-seven million people in the Russian Federation alone. Of these,Soviet authorities had refused passports to nearly 400,000 as “criminaland socially alien elements.”
75Thus compiling a human archive corre-
lated individual bodies within the larger politico-social body and facili-tated the application of violence as technique by identifying those“elements” against whom violence (as either forcible deportation or out-right execution) was to be directed.
The cataloguing project enforced a new and powerful correlation
between individual images and the imagined collective ideal. Photo-graphic representations were inextricably intertwined with sociologicalproﬁles as individuals were catalogued into the People-as-One.
76Carry-STATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 151
72Stepan Podlubnyi, Tagebuch aus Moskau , ed. Jochen Hellbeck (Munich, 1996), pp. 109,
115, 122, 127 (original Russian text from personal communication, Jochen Hellbeck,October 14, 1997); also Jochen Hellbeck, “Fashioning the Stalinist Soul,” Jahrbücher für
Geschichte Osteuropas 44, no. 3 (1996), pp. 351–5.
73Popov , “Pasportnaia sistema,” no. 8, pp. 11–13; also “Pasportnaia sistema Sovetskogo
soiuza,” Nicolaevsky collection, series 227, box 296, folder 18 (I thank Amir Weiner forhelp in obtaining this document).
74Popov , “Pasportnaia sistema,” no. 8, p. 14, n. 4.
75Rapports secrets soviétiques, 1921–1991 , ed. Nicolas Werth and Gaël Moullec (Paris,
1994), pp. 45–7.
76On photography and the emergence of the human archive, see Allen Sekula, 
“The Body and the Archive,” October 39 (1986): 3–64. See also Susanne Regener, 
“ Ausgegrenzt: die optische Inventarisierung des Menschen im Polizeiwesen und in derPsychiatric,” Fotogeschichte 10 (38) (1990): 23–38; David Green, “Veins of Resemblance:
photography and eugenics,” Photography/Politics: Two (1986): 9–21; and Daniel Arasse,
The Guillotine and the Terror , pp. 140–1. The Nazis later relied on passport photographs
to amass an inventory of Jewish faces (Freidländer, Nazi Germany and the Jews , p. 245).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ing over the Bertillon cataloguing system from the Imperial regime,
Soviet dossiers on “criminal elements” and “enemies of the people” inte-grated photographs and autobiographical expostulations alongsidesociological data keyed to the master class grid.
77For some, this linkage
extended to their very last hour and even after death. Execution lists inLeningrad for 1937–8 instructed executioners that, upon taking pos-session of their charges at the prison, they were to interrogate each ofthe condemned, and to check each against his or her photo card, andonly then to shoot them.
78For their human archive, the Gulag admin-
istration supplemented the Bertillon system of photographs with the ﬁn-gerprint system devised by Galton: the identity of some dead detaineeswas conﬁrmed through post-mortem ﬁngerprints.
79
The link between the particular and the universal, the intertwining
of an individual self and the politico-social body , was not reserved solely for criminals. The attempt to correlate individual life trajectorieswith that of the Soviet politico-social body explains the format of theubiquitous questionnaires the Soviet state required its citizens to ﬁll out. Such forms asked for one’s social and economic standing at sig-niﬁcant moments in Soviet society’s trajectory: prior to February 1917;prior to October 1917; before and after collectivization.
80In October
1937, the Soviet state introduced photographs to its internal pass-ports (with a second photograph retained for the police’s shadowarchive), thereby adding the individual’s image to the sociological pro-ﬁles contained in their internal passports.
81Here the macro-description
of a healthy and beautiful society (recall the justiﬁcation for introduc-152 PETER HOLQUIST
77For samples of Soviet criminal dossiers with their photographs, see “ ‘Troika pos-
stanovila: rasstreliat’,” V olia 1994, no. 2–3: 21–79; for other examples, see Rekviem (Orel,
1995), pp. 55–60; Vitaly Shentalinsky , Arrested V oices (New York, 1996).
78Leningradskii martirolog , photograph 23; for the use of photographs among Gulag
inmates, see Peter Maggs, The Mandelstam and “Der Nister” Files (Armonk, NY , 1996), p.
20, M-6, K-25.
79Maggs, The Mandelstam and “Der Nister” Files , pp. 38–40, M-10, M-16.
80These questionnaires were virtually ubiquitous and invariably inquired after one’s
social and political standing at speciﬁc moments in Soviet history . For Red Army ques-tionnaires for defectors (1919), see RGV A, f. 100, op. 2, d. 78, ll. 159–60; also RGV A, f.1389, op. 1, d. 124, l. 160; for questionnaires for captured Antonov insurgents (1921),see Antonovshchina , pp. 283–92; for the forms of the Bureaus on Cooperation with the
GPU on “suspicious and counterrevolutionary elements” (1922), see “Khoroshii kom-munist v to zhe vremia khoroshii chekist,” V estnik staroi ploshchadi 1996, no. 1: 115–19;
for questionnaires for arrestees from Moscow in 1937–8, see V olia , nos. 2–3 (1994): 23;
for forms required of Party members in the Red Army in 1939–40, see V . Zenzinov ,Vstrecha s Rossiei (New York, 1944), pp. 570–1. For how such “mythic” events came to
structure frameworks of meaning for Soviet citizens, see Amir Weiner, “The Making of aDominant Myth,” Russian Review 55, no. 4 (1996): 638–60.
81Popov , “Pasportnaia sistema,” no. 8, p. 13.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ing passports) intersected with individual likenesses. Passports, crimi-
nal dossiers, and workbooks simultaneously portrayed individuals while constituting them within the idealized projection of the socialistPeople-as-One.
This cataloguing of individuals was central not only to situating indi-
viduals within the idealized Bolshevik image of society , but also to thedeletion of those who failed to correspond to this image. While the exacttiming of arrest and the precise charges ﬁled, depended on particularconjunctures, the individuals targeted for arrest and elimination hadbeen identiﬁed long before through the cataloguing process. Thisprocess had already begun with the 1921 ﬁltration campaign, and con-tinued throughout the 1920s and 1930s.
82
In the USSR, as throughout Europe, the human archive came to play
a major role in identifying the speciﬁc individuals against whom stateviolence was to be directed.
83In 1927, Mikhail N. Pokrovskii had pro-
claimed that “the archives’ role is particularly great as a kind of arsenal,from which one can take those weapons that one uses until the momentone comes to use weapons of iron and steel.”
84One archival ofﬁcial elab-
orated upon this point in 1931, declaring proudly that one of thearchives’ functions was to cooperate with Soviet repressive organs. Thistask became nearly their sole pursuit in the 1930s.
85
How could archivists help the Soviet state? By compiling card indexes.
In 1927, a secret decree from the archival administration orderedemployees in the Central State Archive to maintain card-ﬁles on indi-viduals identiﬁed in the holdings of the tsarist police. Two years later,the Northern bureau of the Party’s history section, in collaboration withthe local state archival department, combed through the collections of the regional tsarist gendarme agency and the holdings of the regionalSTATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 153
82Examples are legion. For the extensive documentation on a former Antonov leader,
sentenced to exile in 1930 and executed in 1937, see Antonovshchina , pp. 283–92; the
two Cossack brothers mentioned above, whose father was executed while they success-fully passed through the Civil War’s ﬁltration, were rearrested and executed in 1937, inpart for their participation in the White Army (“Kazach’ia sem’ia Khripunovykh,” pp.74–5).
83Sekula, “Body and the Archive”; Foucault, Discipline and Punish , p. 281; and n. 76
above. For how the compilation of a human archive facilitated the Nazi applications ofviolence against Jews, Gypsies, “the asocial” and the hereditarily and mentally ill, see Alyand Roth, Die restlose Erfassung ; Michael Burleigh and Wolfgang Wipperman, The Racial
State (New York, 1991); Saul Friedländer, Nazi Germany and the Jews , vol. 1, ch. 6; and
Weindling, Health, Race and German Politics , pp. 384–5, 526–30. Weindling notes that
“these surveys were a precondition for extermination” (528).
84V . E. Korneev and O. N. Kopylova, “ Arkhivist v totalitarnom obshchestve: bor’ba za
‘chistotu’ arkhivnykh kadrov ,” Otechestvennye arkhivy 1993, no. 5: 29–43, here at 29.
85T . I. Khorkhordina, Istoriia otechestva i arkhivy: 1917–1980 (Moscow, 1994), pp.
176–9. I thank Jan Plamper for bringing this work to my attention.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
anti-Soviet government from the Civil War. From lists of commenda-
tions, transfer orders, and pay scales in the archive, they drew up a cardﬁle of twenty-ﬁve thousand individuals.
86
And, as state violence intensiﬁed in the 1930s, archival information
was in even greater demand. From the mid-1930s archives containedspecial sections that were staffed exclusively by OGPU employees. Butthe wave of requests for information that followed Kirov’s death in 1934was so great that it swamped the OGPU workers, requiring them to worktwelve to fourteen hour shifts, prompting the party to mobilize studentcommunists and communist pensioners for work in the archives. By1937, archivists were instructed to respond only to the NKVD, to whichthe archival system was totally subordinated in 1938.
87By the late
1930s, thirty archivists in the Central State Archive and forty in theState Military Archive were charged with the sole task of compiling cardcatalogues on people identiﬁed in the ﬁles of White military and civilinstitutions. By 1938, they had produced a card-ﬁle with 105,000names; an expanded search the next year identiﬁed a further 500,000people.
88
Nor was this information of an antiquarian nature. The NKVD cir-
cular ordering the work explained that such searches were necessary to identify “anti-Soviet elements” still living on Soviet territory . Inresponse, the Central State Archive drew up a list of 34,990 “activeenemies of the people” and turned it over to the NKVD “for opera-tional realization.” Archivists identiﬁed 108,694 enemies of the people in 1939. Due to frantic combing through the newly-acquiredBaltic and Ukrainian archives, and in part also to the archivists at the Central State archive who over-fulﬁlled by 100,000 their quota ofcard-ﬁles, archivists identiﬁed a further 1,399,217 enemies in the following year.
89
It was these preexisting card indexes and lists that served as the reser-
voir for arrests and executions upon demand from the Center. Localorgans of the NKVD had ﬁles encompassing ten to ﬁfteen percent of thetotal adult population, usually broken down into three categories of per-niciousness. (Both the 1930 OGPU dekulakization directive and the1937 NKVD order on “anti-Soviet elements” divided their target popu-lations into two categories of “more” and “less harmful,” with the moreharmful slated for execution). When local ofﬁcials received orders fromthe Center for arrests and executions, they simply worked off such lists.154 PETER HOLQUIST
86V . E. Korneev and O. N. Kopylova, “ Arkhivy na sluzhbe totalitarnogo gosudarstva,”
Otechestvennye arkhivy 1992, no. 3: 13–24.
87Khorkhordina, Istoriia otechestva i arkhivy , pp. 177–8.
88Korneev and Kopyleva, “ Arkhivy na sluzhbe,” pp. 19–20.
89Korneev and Kopylova, “ Arkhivy na sluzhbe,” pp. 20–2.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If the quota exhausted the ﬁrst list, they simply moved onto the second
list, and then the third.90
For its campaign against anti-Soviet elements (as per NKVD order
#00447), the most massive of the mass operations, the Soviet staterelied upon its human archive. Two weeks before the operation com-menced, local NKVD branches received an order “to register and clas-sify all hostile and anti-Soviet elements according to their degree ofactivity and social danger,” whom were then further sub-divided intotwo categories: those to be executed and those to be exiled.
91State secu-
rity organs then proceeded with this operation on the basis of theNKVD’s card ﬁles. Only after these ﬁles had been exhausted did theNKVD resort to sweeps of market-places and the fabrication of coun-terrevolutionary organizations.
92
The Soviet cataloguing venture was inextricably linked to the larger
project of sculpting an aestheticized politico-social ideal. Violence-as-technique required a mapping of the politico-social body , to indicatewhat was to be preserved and what was to be eliminated; the catalogu-ing of society did precisely this. In doing so, it united the images of theindividual (both visual and narrative) with that of the politico-socialbody . This linkage forged in a dossier often outlasted the actual individ-ual. The Soviet regime retained its mountains of documentation onthose it had excised from the politico-social body for decades after theindividuals so documented had been executed.
This article has sketched a number of points. First, it has proposed that,
while Bolshevism as ideology was critical for determining how state vio-lence was to be applied, state violence did not originate with the Bolsheviks. In signiﬁcant ways, the Bolsheviks expanded upon statepractices developed in the late Imperial period and massively imple-mented in the First World War. Second, it has argued that the Sovietregime’s application of state violence is better understood as a funda-mentally aesthetic project to sculpt an idealized image of the politico-social body rather than as a narrowly understood medico-prophylacticpursuit. Third, this endeavor of sculpting society was essential to Sovietpolicy from the very ﬁrst; the Great Terror of the 1930s was an exten-sion and expansion of this aspiration, the conjuncture when the regimesought to act on long-standing goals to sculpt society’s human as muchas its raw material. Fourth, the regime’s drive to order and classify itspopulation was central to its larger endeavor of creating a beautiful andSTATE VIOLENCE AS TECHNIQUE 155
90Zemskov , “Demograﬁcheskie aspekty ,” p. 7; also Uimanov , Repressii , 25, 27, 47;
Solzhenitsyn, Gulag Archipelago , 1: 34–35; Khlevniuk, Politbiuro , p. 196.
91Leningradskii martirolog , pp. 38–48, esp. p. 39.
92Oleg Khlevniuk, , “Les mécanismes,” p. 203.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
pure society by enforcing criteria of excision as well as inclusion. While
sanctioning mass violence, the Soviet regime never set the extermina-tion of people as an objective in itself.
Further Reading: Stalinist State Violence
Paul M. Hagenloh, “ ‘Socially Harmful Elements’ and the Great Terror,” in Sheila
Fitzpatrick, ed., Stalinism: New Directions (London, 2000).
Peter Holquist, “ ‘Conduct Merciless, Mass Terror’: Decossackization on the Don,
1919,” Cahiers du Monde russe , vol. 38, no. 1–2 (1997).
Galina Mikhailovna Ivanova, Labor Camp Socialism: The Gulag in the Soviet 
Totalitarian System , trans. Carol Flath (Armonk, NY , 2000).
Michael Jakobson, Origins of the Gulag: The Soviet Prison Camp System,
1917–1934 (Lexington, 1993).
David R. Shearer, “Social Disorder, Mass Repression, and the NKVD during the
1930s,” Cahiers du Monde Russe , vol. 42, no. 2-3-4 (2001).
Amir Weiner, ed., Landscaping the Human Garden (Stanford, 2003).156 PETER HOLQUIST
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Part II The Consequences 
of Stalinism
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Resistance and Conformity
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
7
Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life
in Extraordinary Times
Sheila Fitzpatrick
Excerpted from Sheila Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life
in Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930s (New Y ork: Oxford
University Press, 1999).
Editor’s Introduction
Stalinism had devastating consequences for the Soviet population. Col-
lectivization entailed the dispossession and deportation of millions ofpeasants, many of whom subsequently died of hunger, exposure, ordisease.
1Millions more starved to death in the 1932–3 famine caused by
collectivization and state grain requisitions.2During the Great T error in
the late 1930s the Soviet secret police executed and incarcerated severalmillion more victims.
3After the Second World War, Stalin had entire
national minorities deported from their homelands to Siberia or CentralAsia.
4While scholars disagree on the total number of deaths caused by
Stalinism, there is no doubt that Stalin and his policies killed millions of
1V. P . Danilov, R. T. Manning, L. Viola, eds., Tragediia Sovetskoi derevni: Kollektivizatsiia i rasku-
lachivanie. Dokumenty i materialy v 5 tomakh, 1927–1939 (Moscow, 1999); Lynne Viola, “The
Other Archipelago: Kulak Deportations to the North in 1930,” Slavic Review ,v o l .6 0 ,n o .4
(2001).
2Robert Conquest, Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivization and the Terror-Famine (London,
1986); M. Ellman, “A Note on the Number of 1933 Famine Victims,” Soviet Studies 1991,
no. 2.
3Robert Conquest, The Great Terror:A Reassessment (New Y ork, 1990); in this volume, see
Khlevnyuk. On the Gulag prison camp system, see Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag 
Archipelago , trans. Thomas P . Whitney and Harry Willetts, 3 vols. (New Y ork, 1973–1978);
Galina Mikhailovna Ivanova, Labor Camp Socialism:The Gulag in the Soviet Totalitarian System ,
trans. Carol Flath (Armonk, NY, 2000).
4A. M. Nekrich, The Punished Peoples:The Deportation and Tragic Fate of Soviet Minorities at
the End of the Second World War (New Y ork, 1978); in this volume, see Weiner.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
people.5In addition to those directly shot, imprisoned, or starved, many
other Soviet citizens suffered enormous deprivation and hardship underStalinism.
How did the population react to Stalinist policies? T otalitarian theorists
believed that the extreme brutality and terror of the Soviet system cowedpeople into complete subservience, leaving them atomized and unable toresist. But revisionists challenged this assumption and argued that Sovietcitizens continued to think and act for themselves. Newly opened archiveshave now allowed scholars to conﬁrm that Soviet people not only pursuedtheir own interests, but that they actively or passively resisted Stalinistpolicies. Historians have shown that peasants fought back against col-lectivization, workers engaged in strikes, and Soviet citizens privatelydenounced Stalin and other Communist Party leaders.
6Scholars have also
demonstrated the multiple ways that people tried to operate within theStalinist system, and to turn Soviet policies to their advantage.
7Studies of
resistance, then, represent an important new area of research.
Among those who have written on resistance to Stalinism is Sheila 
Fitzpatrick, the most eminent scholar in the ﬁeld of Soviet history. Forthe past three decades she has conducted pathbreaking research on thesocial and cultural history of the Stalin era. In the following selection,Fitzpatrick describes the lives and attitudes of average citizens under theStalinist regime. She portrays the despotism and upheavals of Stalinism asgiving people a sense that their lives were unpredictable and precarious.While this unpredictability imparted a sense of fatalism, it also encour-aged a certain amount of risk-taking to acquire material goods in this timeof extreme shortage. Soviet citizens took risks both within the system,striving for promotions and perks, and outside the system, stealing foodor bartering on the blackmarket.162 SHEILA FITZPATRICK
5Stephen G.Wheatcroft, “New Demographic Evidence on Excess Collectivization Deaths,”
and S. Roseﬁelde, “New Demographic Evidence on Collectivization Deaths: A Rejoinderto Stephen Wheatcroft,” Slavic Review , vol. 44, no. 3 (1985); Alec Nove, “How Many Victims
in the 1930s,” Soviet Studies 1990 no. 2; J. Arch Getty, Gabor T. Rittersporn, Viktor N.
Zemskov, “Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-war Years: A First Approach onthe Basis of Archival Evidence,” The American Historical Review , vol. 98, no. 4 (1993).
6Jeffrey J. Rossman, “The T eikovo Cotton Workers’ Strike of April 1932: Class, Gender
and Identity Politics in Stalin’s Russia,” The Russian Review , vol. 56, no. 1 (1997); Lynne Viola,
Peasant Rebels Under Stalin: Collectivization and the Culture of Peasant Resistance (New Y ork,
1996); Sarah Davies, Popular Opinion in Stalin’s Russia: Terror, Propaganda and Dissent,
1934–1941 (New Y ork, 1997).
7Sheila Fitzpatrick, Stalin’s Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the Russian Village after Collec-
tivization (New Y ork, 1994); Golfo Alexopoulos, “Portrait of a Con Artist as a Soviet Man,”
Slavic Review , vol. 57, no. 4 (1998); A. K. Sokolov, ed., Obshchestvo i vlast’: 1930-e gody:
Povestvovanie v dokumentakh (Moscow, 1998); N. B. Lebina, Povsednevnaia zhizn’ sovetskogo
goroda, 1920/1930 gody (St. Petersburg, 1999).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In public, the Soviet population conformed to ofﬁcial laws and doc-
trine, and even mouthed slogans of support for Stalin and socialism. Butthis outward conformity did not mean people respected Soviet ofﬁcialsand leaders. As Fitzpatrick argues, most people remained skeptical of ofﬁ-cial proclamations and passively antagonistic toward Communist Partyauthorities. In conversations and anonymous letters, people expressedtheir resentment of Party power and privileges – resentments exacer-bated by the desperate shortages of food, clothing, and housing that char-acterized the Stalin era. Average Soviet citizens complained that Partyofﬁcials lived well while everyone else went hungry, and thus expressedan “us-versus-them” mentality. Contrary to Soviet propaganda, then, muchof the population did not stand united behind Stalin and the CommunistParty.
On the other hand, there were some people who actively or tacitly
supported the Stalinist system. Fitzpatrick writes that active support cameprimarily from those who beneﬁted from the system, including newly pro-moted Party ofﬁcials and Stakhanovites (hero workers).
8Some young
people also identiﬁed with the Soviet cause and worked hard to help buildsocialism. Fitzpatrick notes that the Soviet government was associatedwith progress in the minds of most citizens, especially young enthusiastsbut even those opposed to the Soviet regime. Moreover, the Stalinist statewas virtually the sole provider of goods and services within the system,and as such people came to depend on it for food, clothing, housing, jobs,health care, and pensions. Soviet citizens who wished to receive thesebeneﬁts adopted a posture of supplication, not resistance.
In most cases, then, resistance to Stalinism remained passive. Average
Soviet citizens resented the Party elite and complained about food short-ages, but they did not rise up against the Stalinist regime. Confronting theﬁerce repression and economic hardship of the Soviet system, peoplesought to get by as best they could. This meant outward conformity andeven supplication to Soviet authorities in order to receive beneﬁts of theexpanding Soviet welfare state. It also required using personal connec-tions and illegal means to obtain the food and clothing necessary tosurvive. As Fitzpatrick concludes, Soviet Man ( Homo Sovieticus ) assumed
many different guises, from operator to conformist, but above all he wasa survivor.EVERYDAY STALINISM 163
8On Stakhanovites, see Lewis Siegelbaum, Stakhanovism and the Politics of Productivity in the
Soviet Union, 1935–1941 (New Y ork, 1988).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in
Extraordinary Times
Sheila Fitzpatrick
A popular joke of the 1920s and 1930s concerns a group of rabbits that
appear at the Soviet–Polish frontier, applying for admission to Poland.When asked why they wish to leave, they reply: “The gpu has given
orders to arrest every camel in the Soviet Union.” “But you are notcamels!” “Just try telling that to the gpu.”
1This is one of many rueful
jokes of the period that emphasize the arbitrariness of terror. But terrorwas not the only thing that was arbitrary in Stalin’s Russia. Rewards –for example, those that fell in the laps of celebrity Stakhanovites andother famous ordinary people – were also arbitrary . The whole bureau-cracy acted in a arbitrary manner, minimally guided by law and onlysometimes manipulable via personal connections. Political leaders madeabrupt switches in state policy , often discarding without explanation acourse that had been ruthlessly pursued for years and substitutingsomething completely different, even contradictory . Every time this hap-pened, some arbitrarily chosen scapegoats were punished for overzeal-ousness in carrying out the old policy .
These were circumstances that encouraged fatalism and passivity in
the population, instilling a sense that the individual was not and couldnot be in control of his own fate. These attitudes were often evident inHarvard Project (HP) interviews, notably with respect to questions abouthow Soviet citizens could protect themselves or advance their interests in a variety of hypothetical situations. “They could do nothing” was thefavorite response – even though this was often contradicted when, underfurther questioning, the respondents suggested things the hypotheticalcitizen could do.
2In the real world, of course, Soviet citizens were by no
means totally without strategies of self-protection, however rooted theirsense of dependency and lack of agency . Indeed, to assure the authori-ties of one’s own powerlessness – as the Harvard Project respondentswere doing to their American interviewers – was exactly such a strategy .
1Paraphrased from W . H. Chamberlin, “The ‘ Anecdote’: Unrationed Soviet Humor,”
Russian Review 16: 1 (1957), 31. Another version of the joke is in Iurii Borev , Istoriia
gosudarstva sovetskogo v predaniiakh i anekdotakh (Moscow, 1995), 40.
2Janos Kornai, Economics of Shortage (Amsterdam, 1980), 567; idem, The Socialist
System: The Political Economy of Communism (Princeton, 1992), 56; HP , #357 (XIX), 6;
#394 (XX), 11; #399 (XX), 12.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
“I feel I’ve lived someone else’s life,” said one woman interviewed in
the post-Soviet period, referring to the disruptions that propelled her outof the village at the time of collectivization. This was part of the complexof feelings that led Harvard Project respondents to say that life in theSoviet Union in the 1930s was not “normal,” that one could not “makea normal life.” Respondents never accepted individual or collectiveresponsibility for this; the situation was squarely blamed on “them,” onthe government, on all those external forces that put one’s own life outof one’s control. Abnormality had many aspects, including unpre-dictability , dislocation, and state violence against citizens, but one motifwas constant: it was an abnormal life because of the privations andhardships. Some respondents even used the phrase “living normally” tomean living a comfortable, privileged life – the life to which everyonewas entitled, not the life that most people had. “Normal life” was anideal, not a statistical concept.
3
The sense of unpredictability was heightened by the sharp breaks,
relocations, and deracinations that were part of Soviet lives. The patternstarted with the First World War and Civil War, when huge numbers ofpeople were uprooted geographically and socially , losing touch withfamily and friends, working in occupations different from the ones thathad seemed marked out for them. The Revolution opened doors foradvancement to some people, closed them for others. Then, at the endof the 1920s, came the new upheavals of Stalin’s revolution, shatter-ing routines and expectations once again. Peasants stigmatized askulaks were deported or ran away to the cities, often with little sense ofwhat they wanted out of their new lives. Their sense of dislocation isconveyed in the response of one Harvard Project interviewee, son of akulak expropriated in 1930, who had difﬁculty answering a questionabout what his father had wanted him to be. “When we lived on the landhe wanted me to become a peasant,” he said ﬁnally . “When we werechased from the land we lost all orientation of what we wanted tobecome. I was left up to my fate .”
4
Life could seem just as unpredictable to those who were beneﬁciaries
of Soviet opportunities. All those dazzling success stories (related inChapter 3 of the original publication) of Cinderella-like ascents from theEVERYDAY STALINISM 165
3Barbara Alpern Engel and Anastasia Posadskaya-Vanderbeck, A Revolution of their
Own: V oices of W omen in Soviet History (Boulder, Co., 1997), 46; HP , #511 (XXVI), 6;
#420 (XXI), 10; #4 (1), 36. Note that the complaint about being deprived of the possi-bility of living “normally” was heard once again in the 1980s when it was linked to theperception that the Soviet Union was not a “civilized” country . In its perestroika incarna-
tion, the substance of the complaint was that educated professionals were unable tosecure a Western lifestyle and living standards.
4HP #92 (VU), 39 (my emphasis).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
humblest position to the heights express a sense of astonishment as well
as satisfaction and self-congratulation. In addition, rising to the heightshad its own risks. It could happen that the same person experienced botha sharp ascent and a sudden fall, as was the case with a young manselected by the Komsomol for training as an aviator, whose good fortunewas abruptly cut short when his father was arrested and the familyexiled. There was a recognized trade-off between the beneﬁts of a careerand its disadvantages: as one Harvard respondent put it, “Veterinarywork in general in the Soviet Union is good. A veterinarian has the pos-sibility of getting products [i.e., food]. On the other hand it is like workof every employee and specialist. It is dangerous. There is planning; theplan is high, and a man can be brought to court at any moment.” Somepeople refused to accept promotion because of the greater responsibili-ties and dangers. “To raise one’s position means more responsibility . Thegreater the responsibility , the nearer the unmasking. To sit at the bottomwas safer.”
5
In one of the few peasant diaries we have from the Stalin era, the
writer’s main subject was the weather, which in his world was theprimary arbitrary determinant of good and bad fortune; the gov-ernment was virtually ignored. Urban diarists, by contrast, carefullyrecorded the government’s major initiatives, presumably for the samereason the peasant diarist noted changes in the weather. These Stalin-era diaries are particularly interesting for the amount of time andthought their writers gave to public affairs, especially if one deﬁnes thatconcept broadly to include the economy and the availability or other-wise of consumer goods. Private life and personal emotions are ofcourse present in the diaries, but they seem conﬁned and crowded bypublic events and pressures, always liable to be thrust from center stageby some external crisis.
6
Stepan Podlubnyi wanted to ﬁnd friends, but they should be friends
who could help his project of becoming a good Soviet citizen, free of thetaint of his kulak past. Liubov Shaporina, former wife of the composerIurii Shaporin, wrote obsessively of the loss of her young daughter, butconﬂated that loss and the destruction of her personal happiness withthe intelligentsia’s and Russia’s sufferings at the hands of state duringthe Great Purges. In Arkadii Mankov’s diary , public affairs, viewed witha deeply jaundiced eye, were the main topics, and even when he men-166 SHEILA FITZPATRICK
5L. Sigel’baum [Siegelbaum] and A. Sokolov , eds., “1930-e gody: Obshchestvo i vlast’.
Povestvovanie v dokumentakh,” ms., 199; HP #531. (XXVII), 14 and 28–9; HarvardProject respondent, quoted H. Kent Geiger, The Family in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Mass.,
1968), 172.
6The peasant diarist is Fyodor Shirnov in Intimacy and Terror: Soviet Diaries of the 1930s ,
ed. Veronique Garros, Natalia Korenevskaya, and Thomas Lahusen (New York, 1995).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
tioned family matters, discussion of the state often intruded. For Galina
Shtange, an activist in the wives’ movement, a major theme for her diaryreﬂections was the conﬂict of family obligations and public ones. For theschoolgirl Nina Kosterina, a dedicated chronicler of ﬁrst love and friend-ship in the early part of her diary , private life became hopelessly com-promised and entangled with public issues after the arrest of her fatheras an “enemy of the people.”
7
Little wonder that Russians looking back on their lives in the Stalin
period often use public events, not private ones, as markers and framingdevices. When an American scholar interviewed old Russian peasantwomen about their lives at the beginning of the 1990s, his interviews“were designed to capture their experiences with childbirth and childcare, on the assumption that the birth and nurture of children are deﬁn-ing events of a woman’s life.” He found, however, that public eventsdominated both the lives and the women’s way of remembering them.“The life of virtually every woman I interviewed was . . . shaped more
powerfully by the events of the early 1930s. Nearly every woman had abroken life, with the break dating to that time (although for some thewar played an even bigger role). Their children were important to them,but their identity and the places they ended up in life were deﬁned muchmore by the upheavals of the 1930s.”
8
When respondents in the Harvard Project were asked how to get
ahead in Soviet society , some said education and proletarian origins,some said time-serving and informing, many said connections, and afew said luck.
9Luck was indeed extremely important. For this reason,
Stalinist citizens, although generally passive, were also intermittent risk-takers – people who bought lottery tickets and played the potentiallydangerous game of denouncing their bosses; people who were liable totell anti-Soviet jokes, and who sometimes, when drunk, made obscenegestures at sacred images in public places. They were by no means ascautious as one might expect of persons living under a highly repressiveregime, perhaps because they had no conﬁdence that caution wouldensure survival.EVERYDAY STALINISM 167
7Jochen Hellbeck, ed., Tagebuch aus Moskau 1931–1939 (Munich, 1996); diaries of
Shrange, and Shaporina in Intimacy and Terror ; A. G. Man’kov , “Iz dnevnika riadovogo
cheloveka (1933–1934 gg.),” Zvezda , 1994 no. 5, and “Iz dnevnika 1938–1941 gg.,”
ibid., 1995 no. 11; Nina Kosterina, Dnevnik Niny Kosterinoi (Moscow, 1964).
8David L. Ransel, “Summer Nurseries under the Soviets as Device for Mobilizing Peasant
Women and Diminishing Infant Mortality ,” paper delivered to First Midwest RussianHistory Workshop, Ann Arbor, March 1991, and private communications to the author,14 and 23 January 1998. See also responses in Engel, Revolution , using revolution, col-
lectivization, and war as markers: e.g. 83, 114, 128–9, 173.
9See, for example, HP #3 (1), II; #4 (1), 9; #8 (1), 9.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Risk-taking was sometimes a necessity for effective functioning.
Industrial managers, for example, could not get the raw materials, spareparts, and labor they needed without breaking rules and taking risks,despite the ever-present possibility that they would be punished. Theeconomic historian Joseph Berliner pointed out that in the Soviet Union“the successful manager, the one who climbs swiftly to the top andmakes a brilliant career, is the one who is willing to hazard arrest andprison sentence. There is a selective process at work which raises therisktaker to the top, and causes the timid to fall by the wayside.”
10
Risk-taking (as opposed to prudent calculation) was held in high
popular esteem. Even the literary intelligentsia, one of the most intimi-dated and risk-averse groups in Soviet society , made heroes of its risk-takers as well as its martyrs. Writers like Mikhail Bulgakov who sailedright up to (or beyond) the limits of the permissible in their writings wereadmired for doing so; journal editors and theater directors won prestigewith their peers, as well as risking punishment, when they tried topublish or stage such works.
The gambling mentality , it should be noted, was a direct antithesis of
the rational planning mentality that the regime in principle approvedand tried to inculcate in its citizens. In ofﬁcial discourse, there wasnothing more glorious than the Five-Year Plan and the regularity andpredictability suggested by the phrase “according to the plan.” Spon-taneity or happenstance, the opposite of predictability , was somethingthat had to be overcome; accident (in the sense of unpredicted occur-rence) was not only deplorable but epistemologically trivial; the term“accidental elements” was used for people who had no right to be there,or simply no rights. Yet all this stood in a dialectical relationship to the mentality of most Soviet citizens, who looked to “spontaneity” (anagentless concept in Russian) to deliver them when they were headedfor trouble with the regime’s plans, and knew that what “planned dis-tribution” of goods really meant was shortages.
11
A propensity for occasional or even regular risk-taking did not mean
that people were not frightened of the regime. Of course they werefrightened given the regime’s proven willingness to punish, the strengthof its punitive arm, its long and vengeful memory , and the unpre-dictability of its outbursts. Hence, the normal posture of a Soviet citizenwas passive conformity and outward obedience. This did not mean,however, that Soviet citizens necessarily had a high respect for author-ity . On the contrary , a degree of skepticism, even a refusal to take the168 SHEILA FITZPATRICK
10Joseph Berliner, “Blat is Higher than Stalin,” Problems of Communism 3:1 (1954), 31.
11The Russian terms are po planu, planomernost’, planovoe nachalo, planovoe raspredelenie;
stikhiinost’ (spontaneity) and sluchainost’ (accident), both antonyms of zakonomernost’;
sluchainye elementy .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
regime’s most serious pronouncements fully seriously , was the norm. Of
all the Soviet citizen’s repertoire of everyday resistance, the popularphrase “This too will pass,” said with a shrug in response to some newpolicy initiative from above, was one of the most devastating from theregime’s standpoint. Although the literature of socialist realism did itsbest to provide exemplars of purposeful, dedicated, effective leadership,other images of authority proved at least as durable.
12
In two of the most widely read and best-loved literary classics of the
prewar Stalin period, Ilf and Petrov’s Twelve Chairs and The Golden Calf ,
the hero is a conﬁdence man whose stock in trade is his ability to out-talk and out-think slow-witted local ofﬁcials. In the ﬁlm Lieutenant Kizhe
(1934), now best remembered for its score by Prokoﬁev , the authorities(from the time of Emperor Paul) are so stupid that they appoint a manto the Guards, disgrace him and sentence him to Siberia, pardon him,and promote him once again to the rank of general – all without notic-ing that he never existed. In the great popular literary success of theSecond World War, Aleksandr Tvardovski’s Vasilii Terkin , the eponymous
protagonist is an anti-hero who possesses all the foraging and survivalskills needed by Homo Sovieticus and has the same good-humored con-
tempt for authority as Jaroslav Hasek’s Good Soldier Schweik .
13
The antithesis of “us” and “them” was basic to Soviet subaltern men-
tality in the 1930s. “They” were the people who ran things, the peopleat the top, the ones with power and privilege. “We” were the ones at thebottom, little people without power or privilege whom “they” pushedaround, exploited, deceived, and betrayed. Of course, the dividing lineshifted according to the speaker’s own position. Just as no Soviet pro-fessional of the Brezhnev period ever admitted to being a “bureau-crat,”
14so no Soviet citizen of the 1930s was likely to identify himself
as one of “them,” either with respect to power or privilege. “They” – theones with real power and privilege – always existed in a higher sphere
than the speaker.
15
For one kolkhoznik, writing to express his views on the Constitution,
there were two classes in society: “[white-collar] employees and theEVERYDAY STALINISM 169
12“This too will pass” =Proidet . On the Soviet positive hero, see Katerina Clark, The Soviet
Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago, 1985), 167–71 and passim.
13I. Il’f and L. Petrov , Dvenadtsat’ stul’ev (1918) and Zolotoi telenok (1930–31); Harlow
Robinson, Sergei Prokoﬁev (New York, 1988), 277; ( Kizhe ); Aleksandr Tvardovskii, Vasilii
Terkin (1941–45). Note that the equally popular samizdat sequel of the post-Stalin
period, Terkin na tom svete (1954–63) [in Aleksandr Tvardovskii, Vasilii Terkin (Moscow,
1995)] was an explicit mockery of Soviet bureaucracy .
14See Jerry F . Hough, Democratization and Revolution in the USSR, 1985–1991
(Washington, D.C., 1997), 52.
15For an interesting discussion, see Sarah Davies, “ ‘Us Against Them’: Social Identities
in Soviet Russia, 1934–41,” Russian Review 56:1 (1997).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
workers are one class, and the second class is kolkhozniks [who] bear all
the burdens, all the hard work and all the taxes, and the employees haveno [burden], as the ruling class.” But workers who addressed this topicalways saw their own class as the one that was exploited. “ComradeZhdanov , at all the meetings they talk about the classless society , but infact it isn’t like this, you have a handful of people who live and forgetabout Communism. It is time to stop feeding [senior ofﬁcials], it is timeto close the ‘Torgsins,’ ” wrote one aggrieved group anonymously .Administrators “live in the best conditions and live at the expense of thelabour of the working class,” complained another worker, noting that“new classes have developed here, with the only difference being thatthey are not called classes.”
16
For many Soviet citizens, it seems, privilege and political power
became so closely linked in the 1930s that there was little room for otherkinds of class hostilities. Resentment of privilege was very strong, but itseems to have been directed almost solely against the privileges of ofﬁce-holders, that is, against the state and the Communist Party , not againstthe privileges of the intelligentsia. When Harvard Project interviewers,looking for data on class antagonisms within the society , asked which ofthe basic social groups (intelligentsia, employees, workers, peasants)received “less than they deserved,” they received a remarkable response– in effect, ironically , a rousing endorsement for Stalin’s claim that classantagonism had been eliminated in the Soviet Union. Allsocial classes,
even the intelligentsia, were considered to receive “less than theydeserved” – by a majority of respondents of all classes, although admit-tedly only about half the working-class and peasant respondents hadthis opinion of the intelligentsia. In addition, many respondents has-tened to remind the interviewers that there was another relevant groupthat had been omitted from the question, namely “party people”: theywere the ones who got more than they deserved.
17
This tenderness toward the intelligentsia on the part of workers and
peasants is surprising, since anti-intelligentsia feeling had apparentlyrun strong in the working class in the revolution and throughout the1920s, when “bourgeois specialists” were frequently attacked as sur-vivors of the Tsarist privileged classes who had managed to hang on totheir privileges despite the Revolution. During the 1928 Shakhty trial,workers not only accepted the state prosecutor’s view that the engineers170 SHEILA FITZPATRICK
16GARF , f. 3316, op. 40, d. 14, 1. 80 (1936); TsGAIPD f. 24, op. 2v , d. 1518, 1. 32 (letter
signed “Workers of the Kirov plant,” 1935); worker’s comment (1934), quoted in SarahDavies, Popular Opinion in Stalin’s Russia: Terror , Propaganda and Dissent, 1934–1941
(Cambridge, 1997), 139.
17Alex Inkeles, The Soviet Citizen: Daily Life in a Totalitarian Society (New York, 1968),
300–1.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
charged were guilty of sabotage and treason, but even tended to go
further (“Ripping their heads off would be soft treatment”; “We mustshoot all of them or else we’ll have no peace.”
18).
If these attitudes went into remission in the 1930s, this may have
been because the regime’s “war against the nation,” as Adam Ulam hascalled it, focused popular anger exclusively on the party and its leaders,or it may have been a response to the fact that the intelligentsia had been substantially renewed through state-sponsored and other upwardmobility from the lower classes since 1928.
19It should also be noted,
however, that the Harvard Project respondents probably understood the“less than they deserved” question as an inquiry about victimizationrather than about privilege. The notion of collective victimization wasmuch favored by Soviet citizens, and they were not exclusionary in theirapplication of it. There was more satisfaction in pointing out that vir-tually everyone suffered than in quibbling about degrees.
So far, I have been describing popular attitudes to the regime that 
fall mainly in the range between passive acceptance and cautious hos-tility . Lack of personal security , suppression of religion, the emergenceof a new privileged class, and police surveillance and terror no doubtcontributed to this broadly based popular criticism of the regime in the 1930s. But the primary cause of it was surely economic: people were living badly , worse than they had done ten or twenty years earlier.“We were better off before” (during nep, under the Tsars) was probably
the most frequently reported of all critical comments in the nkvd ’s 
summaries of popular opinion. Under such circumstances, it wouldhave been extraordinary if people had not blamed the government, allthe more in that the privation ordinary citizens experienced was soclearly related to government policies like collectivization and crashindustrialization.
Despite its promises of future abundance and massive propaganda of
its current achievements, the Stalinist regime did little to improve thelife of its people in the 1930s. Judging by the nkvd ’s soundings of pub-
lic opinion, a problematic source but the only one available to us, theStalinist regime was relatively though not desperately unpopular inRussian towns. (In Russian villages, especially in the ﬁrst half of the1930s, its unpopularity was much greater.) Overall, as the nkvd regu-
larly reported and ofﬁcial statements repeated, the ordinary “little man”in Soviet towns, who thought only of his own and his family’s welfare,EVERYDAY STALINISM 171
18Quoted in Matthew E. Lenoe, “Soviet Mass Journalism and the Transformation of
Soviet Newspapers, 1926–1932,” (Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1997), 313.
19Adam B. Ulam, Stalin (New York, 1973) (ch. 8: “The War against the Nation”). On
renewal of elites, see Sheila Fitzpatrick, Education and Social Mobility in the Soviet Union,
1921–1934 (Cambridge, 1979), ch. 9.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
was “dissatisﬁed with Soviet power,” though in a somewhat fatalistic
and passive manner.20The post- nep situation was compared unfavor-
ably with nep, and Stalin – despite the ofﬁcially fostered Stalin cult – was
compared unfavorably with Lenin, sometimes because he was morerepressive but more often because he let the people go hungry .
This is not to say that Stalin’s regime was without support from its
citizens. Active support came from the young, the privileged, ofﬁce-holders and party members, beneﬁciaries of afﬁrmative action policies,and favored groups like Stakhanovites. Of these, the young are perhapsthe most interesting category . Less inclined than their elders to react toeconomic hardship, urban youth, or at least an impressive proportion ofthat group, as well as many young peasants with some schooling, seemto have assimilated Soviet values, associating them with a rejection ofall that was boring, corrupt, unprincipled, old, and routine, and identi-ﬁed, often passionately and enthusiastically , with Soviet ideals. Theywere ready to go adventuring in the Soviet cause: they grew up wantingto go on polar expeditions and volunteer to build Komsomolsk in the FarEast. This was the cohort that, as Solzhenitsyn put it, had grown upunder Soviet power and regarded the revolution as “ours.” Even youngpeople who had experienced stigmatization on the grounds of theirsocial origin often shared this “Soviet” orientation of their more fortu-nate peers. “I didn’t join the party , but I was a Communist at heart,” saida teacher, who suffered much in the 1930s for being a priest’s daugh-ter, in a recent interview .
21
The attitudes of the majority of urban citizens who were not active
supporters of the regime are much harder to get at than those of theactivists and youthful enthusiasts. The working class, to which theregime had looked for support in the 1920s, had changed so much as aresult of peasant inﬂux and the upward mobility of “old” workers thatboth its coherence as a class and the workers’ sense of a special con-nection with the regime must be called into question. A number of laborhistorians see the dominant motif of the 1930s as state exploitation andworker resistance. It is likely , nevertheless, that many workers retaineda residual feeling of connection with the Soviet cause, especially in citieswith a strong revolutionary tradition like Leningrad, and that this con-stituted passive support for the regime.
22172 SHEILA FITZPATRICK
20Although passivity was the rule, there were exceptions: see Jeffrey J. Rossman, “The
Teikovo Cotton Workers’ Strike of April 1932: Class, Gender and Identity Politics inStalin’s Russia,” Russian Review 56:1 (1997).
21Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago , trans. Thomas P . Whitney (New York,
1974), 160; Geiger, Family , 300; Engel, Revolution , 97.
22On labor in the 1930s, see Lewis Siegelbaum and Ronald Grigor Suny , eds., Making
W orkers Soviet: Power , Class, and Identity (Ithaca, 1994), and the excellent summary of
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
It has recently been argued that it makes no more sense to ask
whether Soviet citizens did or did not accept the Soviet worldview thanto ask whether medieval people accepted the Christian worldview: therewas simply no other available.
23The analogy has obvious weaknesses
since in the Soviet case everyone over thirty in 1937 could perfectly wellremember a pre-Soviet world, and in the census of that year more thanhalf the population identiﬁed themselves as religious believers, thusrejecting a basic tenet of the Soviet worldview . Nevertheless, the argu-ment is useful in reminding us that most people most of the time doaccept their governments, and the chances are that the Russian urbanpopulation in the 1930s was no exception.
24
In the ﬁrst place, the Soviet government had positioned itself as the
repository of national sentiment and patriotism; its nation-building andnational-strengthening projects could appeal even to citizens who com-plained about shortages and resented the privileges of the ofﬁce-holdingelite. In addition, in the course of the 1930s the Russian element inSoviet patriotism came increasingly to the fore, with the return ofRussian history to the school curriculum, of uniforms and insignia forthe Soviet Army that resembled those of the former Russian ImperialArmy , and so on.
25This was likely to raise passive-approval rates as far
as the Russian population was concerned, though it may have had otherconsequences in the non-Russian republics.
In the second place, this was a regime that had apparently success-
fully associated itself with progress in the minds of many of its citizens.If the Soviet worldview was not literally the only one available to Russians in the 1930s, it was the only available worldview linked tomodernity . Whether or not the Soviet regime had broad legitimacy withthe population, its modernizing (civilizing) mission appears to have doneso. As far as we can tell, most people accepted the dichotomy of “back-wardness” and “culture” and the proposition that the regime wasEVERYDAY STALINISM 173
the current state of knowledge in Ronald Grigor Suny , The Soviet Experiment (New York,
1998), 240–49. For the exploitation position, see Donald Filtzer, Soviet W orkers and Stal-
inist Industrialization: The Formation of Modern Soviet Production Relations, 1928–1941(Armonk, N.Y ., 1986), 8–9; on resistance, see Rossman, “Teikovo.”
23Jochen Hellbeck, “Fashioning the Stalinist Soul: The Diary of Stepan Podliubnyi
(1931–1939),” Jahrbucher fur Geschichte Osteuropas , Bd. 44, Heft 3 (1996), 365; see also
Stephen Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization (Berkeley , 1995), 225–30.
24The rural population is another matter for, as I argued in Stalin’s Peasants: Resistance
and Survival in the Russian Village after Collectivization (New York, 1994), the trauma of
collectivization left the peasantry angry and alienated throughout the decade. For censusdata, see Iu. A. Poliakov , et al., “Polveka molchaniia (Vsesoiuznaia perepis’ naseleniia1937 g.),” Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniia , 1990 no. 7, 65–6.
25See ch. 4 [of the original publication], and N. S. Timasheff, The Great Retreat: The
Growth and Decline of Communism in Russia (New York, 1946).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
helping the population to become less backward and more cultured that
lay at the heart of the Soviet message. They may personally have cher-ished some aspects of their own backwardness (e.g., getting drunk andbeating their wives), but this was quite compatible with accepting thatdrunkenness and wife-beating were bad and signs of an uncultured,undeveloped human being. It could even be that the same person whogrumbled one day about the disappearance of ﬁsh from the market wascapable the next day of telling his neighbor that grumbling about short-ages was a sign of backwardness and lack of political development.
In the third place, the Soviet state was becoming a welfare state,
however incomplete and spasmodic its delivery of beneﬁts in the 1930s.The state was the monopoly distributor of goods and services, whichmeant that allocation – the power to decide who got what – was one ofits most important functions. As Janos Kornai puts it, in Soviet-typesystems the population is under the “paternalistic tutelage” and care ofthe party and state. “The bureaucracy stands in loco parentis ,” he writes,
“all other strata, groups, or individuals in society are children, wardswhose minds must be made up for them by their adult guardians.” The citizen’s natural posture toward a state that controls distribution of goods and beneﬁts is one of supplication, not resistance. It may alsobe one of passive dependence; indeed Soviet ofﬁcials frequently com-plained about the “dependent” habits of Homo Sovieticus , his lack of ini-
tiative and his stubborn expectation that the state would and shouldprovide.
26
The Soviet state, with which citizens’ everyday lives were so entan-
gled, was a peculiar hybrid. On the one hand, it remained revolutionary ,committed to changing the world and shaking up the lives of its citizens,and retaining all the violence, intolerance, and suspicion that pertain tothose aims. On the other hand, it was moving toward the welfare-statepaternalism that would characterize Soviet-type systems in the postwarperiod, and was already perceived by its citizens in these terms. Thesetwo facets of the state seem very different, but they had important ele-ments in common. First, both the revolutionary and the paternaliststates disdained law and bureaucratic legalism, preferring voluntaristsolutions in the ﬁrst case and personalistic ones in the second. Second,both had a very strong sense of the responsibilities of leadership. In rev-olutionary terminology , this was the vanguard concept. In the pater-nalist state, the vanguard concept became, in effect, “Father knowsbest.”174 SHEILA FITZPATRICK
26Kornai, Socialist System , 315, 56. On the allocative function of the state, see 
Katherine Verdery , National Ideology under Socialism: Identity and Cultural Politics in 
Ceausescu’s Romania (Berkeley , 1991), 74–83. “Dependent” =izhdivencheskii .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
If we consider what models or metaphors of the Soviet state might
help us understand the practices of Homo Sovieticus , several possibilities
present themselves. In the ﬁrst place, Soviet society may be conceptual-ized as a prison or a conscript army . This catches the elements of regi-mentation, strict discipline, and conﬁnement within a closed institutionwith its own strict codes of behavior, often bewildering to outsiders. Thebehavior of prisoners and conscripts reﬂects their fear of punishment,which may be incurred by failing to follow orders or random mischance.A sharp dividing line separates guards and ofﬁcers in such institutionsfrom inmates and recruits: these are “us” and “them” situations. Bully-ing by guards/ofﬁcers produces resentment, though it is also seen as part of the natural order of things. There are informers among the inmates, but “ratting” to the authorities on other inmates is never-theless strongly condemned in the inmate community . Desertion/attempting to escape is severely punished. In the case of the army , patriotism and the spirit of patriotic duty are strongly inculcated.
Another way of conceptualizing Soviet society is as a school of the
strict type, probably a boarding school. The school is also a closed insti-tution with its own conventions and discipline. School spirit, the localform of patriotism, is inculcated. A social gulf separates teachers andpupils; tattling to the teachers is prevalent, but disapproved of in the pupilcommunity . Teachers often speak in homilies, recommending virtuessuch as cleanliness, quietness, politeness, and respect for elders andschool property that pupils may or may not inwardly accept but in anycase regard as suitable only for the teacher-dominated public sphere, notfor private intercourse with fellow pupils. Many activities in the schoolthat are described as voluntary are in fact compulsory , and in generalpupils often observe and privately ridicule the hypocrisy of the school’spublic discourse and the divergence from it of the teachers’ conduct.
There is, however, an important difference between schools and other
closed institutions – schools have the function of education. The schoolis a civilizing institution: its raison d’être is to impart the learning andbehavioral skills appropriate to the adult (cultured) society that the chil-dren will eventually have to join. Most pupils accept the premise that,however unpleasant the educational process may be, it is ultimately fortheir own good. This model undoubtedly comes closest to the Sovietregime’s self-conception as an enlightened vanguard carrying out a civilizing mission. Education was one of the regime’s core values; school – as in the epithet “school for socialism,” applied to a variety ofSoviet institutions from the trade unions to the Red Army – was a key metaphor.
Finally , there is another less exalted model of the Soviet state that may
help illuminate Soviet everyday practices: the soup kitchen or the reliefEVERYDAY STALINISM 175
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
agency . Soviet citizens were masters of self-representation as the deserv-
ing poor; they regarded it as the state’s obligation to provide them withfood, clothing, and shelter. Very likely , being deserving poor, they alsofeel an obligation to work, but the relationship of work to welfare is notseen as reciprocal. The whole range of supplicatory and dependentbehaviors characteristic of Soviet citizens outlined above ﬁts the soupkitchen model better than any of the others. The client of a soup kitchendoes not feel that he or she is involved in a self-improvement project, incontrast to the school pupil, nor has he the strong fear of punishmentand sense of loss of freedom characteristic of prisoners and armyrecruits. He may or may not feel grateful to the organizers of the soupkitchen, although periodically he is likely to reproach them for not pro-viding enough soup or saving the best meals for favorite clients. Butbasically he sees the soup kitchen just as a source of goods he needs, andjudges it primarily by the quantity and quality of the goods and the con-venience of obtaining them.
This book has described a wide range of practices of everyday life in
Stalin’s Russia: “getting” goods legally and illegally , using patrons andconnections, counting living space in square meters, quarreling in com-munal apartments, “free” marriage, petitioning, denouncing, inform-ing, complaining about ofﬁcials, complaining about privilege, enjoyingprivilege, studying, volunteering, moving up, tumbling down, confusingthe future and the present, mutual protection, self-criticism, scapegoat-ing, purging, bullying subordinates, deferring to ofﬁcials, lying aboutsocial origin, unmasking enemies, hunting spies, and many others. Itwas a life in which outward conformity to ideology and ritual mattered,but personal ties mattered even more. It was a life of random disastersand of manifold daily irritations and inconveniences, from the hourswasted in queues and lack of privacy in communal apartments to theendless bureaucratic rudeness and red tape and the abolition, in thecause of productivity and atheism, of a common day of rest. There werefearful things that affected Soviet life and visions that uplifted it, butmostly it was a hard grind, full of shortages and discomfort. Homo Sovi-
eticus was a string-puller, an operator, a time-server, a freeloader, a
mouther of slogans, and much more. But above all, he was a survivor.
Furthering Reading: Resistance and Conformity under Stalin
Golfo Alexopoulos, Stalin’s Outcasts: Aliens, Citizens, and the Soviet State,
1926–1936 (Ithaca, 2002).
Sarah Davies, Popular Opinion in Stalin’s Russia: Terror , Propaganda and Dissent,
1934–1941 (New York, 1997).176 SHEILA FITZPATRICK
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Sheila Fitzpatrick, Stalin’s Peasants: Resistance and Survival in the Russian Village
after Collectivization (New York, 1994).
Lesley A. Rimmel, “ Svodki and Popular Opinion in Stalinist Leningrad,” Cahiers
du Monde russe , vol. 40 (1999).
Jeffrey J. Rossman, “The Teikovo Cotton Workers’ Strike of April 1932: Class,
Gender and Identity Politics in Stalin’s Russia,” The Russian Review , vol. 56,
no. 1 (1997). 
Lewis Siegelbaum and Andrei Sokolov , Stalinism as a Way of Life: A Narrative in
Documents (New Haven, 2000).
Lynne Viola, Peasant Rebels Under Stalin: Collectivization and the Culture of Peasant
Resistance (New York, 1996).
Lynne Viola, ed., Contending with Stalinism: Soviet Power and Popular Resistance
in the 1930s (Ithaca, 2002).EVERYDAY STALINISM 177
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Stalinist Subjectivity
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
8
Working, Struggling, Becoming:
Stalin-Era Autobiographical T exts
Jochen Hellbeck
Originally appeared as Jochen Hellbeck, “Working, Struggling,
Becoming: Stalin-Era Autobiographical T exts,” The Russian Review ,
vol. 60, no. 3 (2001).
Editor’s Introduction
While research on resistance emphasizes the population’s rejection of
Stalinist policies and ideology, other new research suggests that at leastsome people accepted and internalized the ofﬁcial Soviet worldview. Inorder to gauge citizens’ internalization of ofﬁcial values, it is necessary togain access to their inner thoughts, and to analyze how the Stalinist systemshaped their sense of self. Because individuals think and act according totheir understanding of themselves and their place in the world, their senseof self determines their ability to become subjects, or actors, in everydaylife. Subjectivity – the capacity to think and act based on a coherent senseof self – is therefore a crucial area of inquiry for historians studying howpeople were affected by Stalinism.
As already discussed, the totalitarian model presented Stalinism as ter-
rorizing the population into complete subservience, forcing people to hidetheir true selves or eliminating their sense of self altogether. Revisionistsand historians of resistance countered that individuals in Soviet societydid have a sense of themselves and their interests, and that they supportedor opposed policies based on self-interest. But some post-revisionistthinkers have argued that people’s sense of themselves and their interestsdid not arise independently of the system in which they lived.These schol-ars have criticized the tendency to assume that people had a pre-existingsense of self-interest which transcended the historical speciﬁcities of theirtime and place.
1According to this view, historical agency exists, but it is
1See, for example, Anna Krylova, “The T enacious Liberal Subject in Soviet Studies,” Kritika ,
vol. 1, no. 1 (2000).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
not the agency of free-thinking, self-made individuals, as depicted in liberal
thought. Instead, state power and ofﬁcial discourse play a role in consti-tuting individuals as subjects.
2
In the following article, Jochen Hellbeck explains that Soviet authori-
ties purposefully set out to make people into revolutionary subjects.Rather than seeking to repress or obliterate people’s sense of self,Stalinist institutions and propaganda were intended to foster consciouscitizens, who would voluntarily participate in the building of socialism andderive their sense of self from doing so. In this way, Stalinist state powerwas productive as well as repressive, for it offered people a coherentsense of self and purpose.The objective of Soviet authorities was to makecitizens understand their lives as part of the larger revolutionary project.For those who accepted their place in this project, Soviet power offeredan opportunity to contribute to something of world historical importance,the creation of socialism which heralded a new era for humankind.
Hellbeck highlights Soviet practices of subjectivization – the process by
which individuals were inculcated with a sense of themselves as partici-pants in the grand crusade of building socialism. Political agitation, edu-cation, and even gulag prison camps (where “bourgeois elements” weresupposedly reformed through hard labor) all provided means to instill inpeople a new consciousness – an awareness of themselves as historicalagents in the process of revolutionary transformation. Soviet authoritiesalso required people to engage in autobiographical writing and speakingto make them reﬂect on their lives. Collective autobiographies such asthe factory history project enlisted thousands of workers to write thestory of Stalinist industrialization. The theme of these ofﬁcially sponsoredautobiographies was not only how workers built a new world, but alsohow building it transformed them into new people – fully conscious sub-jects who had realized their human potential.
3
T o conduct his inquiry into Stalinist subjectivity, Hellbeck utilizes the
personal diaries of people who lived in the Stalin era. These diaries revealthat some people did internalize Soviet categories and ideology. Diaristssought to chronicle the building of socialism and described their own lives as part of this larger collective struggle. In this way they represented182 JOCHEN HELLBECK
2Even in liberal democracies the state plays a role in shaping people as self-interested sub-
jects. Through private property rights and a discourse on individualism, the state helps givecitizens an understanding of themselves and their world. One might add that in Westernsocieties, microscopic networks of power and non-state institutional practices, from religious confession to psychoanalysis, also constituted individuals as subjects. See MichelFoucault, “The Subject and Power,” in Foucault, Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics ,
ed. by Hubert Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow (Chicago, 1982).
3See also Igal Halﬁn, “From Darkness to Light: Student Communist Autobiography during
NEP ,” Jahrbucher fur Geschichte Osteuropas , vol. 45, no. 2 (1997).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ideal Soviet subjects, who achieved self realization by understanding their
lives in terms of the overall revolutionary project. Even a worker who inhis diary denounced the Stalinist regime for capitalist exploitation did sousing ofﬁcial terminology and with the hope that real socialism might ultimately be achieved. Other diarists described material hardship underStalinism, but did so in order to emphasize their heroic sacriﬁce in build-ing socialism.
People also used their diaries as instruments of self reﬂection and self
improvement. Hellbeck quotes one diarist who chastised himself for pettythoughts and vowed instead to focus on the heroic tasks of socialist con-struction. He and other diarists thereby sought to imbue their lives withlarger ideological meaning and to rise above selﬁsh individual concerns.For those who adopted the ofﬁcial Soviet worldview, the life of the indi-vidual and the life of the collective were supposed to merge into one.Private life was to disappear under socialism, as people found individualfulﬁllment by joining the collective. At least some Soviet citizens came tothink in these terms, as shown by Hellbeck’s important work.STALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 183
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Working, Struggling, Becoming:
Stalin-Era Autobiographical T exts
Jochen Hellbeck
One of the assumptions most deeply ingrained in the Western imagina-
tion of the Stalinist regime is that at their core, members of Sovietsociety resided externally to state policies and Bolshevik ideology .Though the “system” was successful, through a combination of pro-paganda and coercion, in enforcing a degree of outward popular conformity , individuals were able to mitigate these pressures by retreat-ing into private spheres unaffected by “ofﬁcial” ideology . In search of Soviet citizens’ concealed or repressed selves, scholars have placedhigh hopes on the newly available “hidden transcripts” (James Scott) of Soviet society: secret NKVD reports and interrogations, unpub-lished correspondence, diaries. It is in this body of unofﬁcial or secretsources that the authentic scripts of individual selfhood, the essence of their subjectivity , is expected to be uncovered. In the Stalinist con-text subjectivity , which I deﬁne as a capacity for thought and actionderived from a coherent sense of self, is thus regarded as a quality that manifests itself against, and in spite of, the policies of the Sovietstate.
1
A related, but more pessimistic view casts doubt on Soviet citizens’
ability to develop any notion of individual subjectivity at all. Accordingto this view, all political initiative was monopolized by the revolutionarystate, and revolutionary politics by their very nature undercut the pro-duction of stable identities. As a consequence, Soviet citizens were jolted
I am grateful to Igal Halﬁn, David Hoffmann, Peter Holquist, and the workshop and 
conference participants at the University of Michigan, Michigan State University , University of California at Berkeley , University of California at Riverside, Stanford University , and the Maison des Sciences de l’Homme, Paris, for their comments and suggestions. I also want to thank Véronique Garros, Natalya Korenevskaya, and ThomasLahusen for generously sharing with me a great number of diaries from the Stalin period. Support for the writing of this article was provided by the Michigan Society ofFellows.
1See Jochen Hellbeck, “Speaking Out: Languages of Afﬁrmation and Dissent in 
Stalinist Russia,” Kritika I/1 (Winter 2000): 71–96. The latest to invoke James Scott’s
dichotomy of ofﬁcial and hidden transcripts are J. Arch Getty and Oleg V . Naumov , The
Road to Terror: Stalin and the Self-Destruction of the Bolsheviks, 1932–1939 (New Haven,
1999). For a critique of this essentially liberal conceptualization of the self see AnnaKrylova, “The Tenacious Liberal Subject in Soviet Studies,” Kritika I/1 (Winter 2000):
119–46.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
out of traditional frames of self-deﬁnition and kept suspended in a
climate of recurrent rupture, insecurity , and disorientation.2
What links these two interpretations is the notion that the Soviet
regime sought to subjugate individuals’ sense of selfhood, forcing themto conceal their subjectivities or obliterating them altogether. My articlehighlights an opposite dynamic: it argues that the primary effect onindividuals’ sense of self of the Revolution of 1917 and of Soviet revo-lutionary practice was not repressive, but productive. To a large extentrevolutionary politics centered on creating revolutionary selves, onmaking Soviet citizens think of themselves and act as conscious his-torical subjects.
3The activities of autobiographical reﬂection, writing,
and speech formed an important medium through which revolutionarysubjectivities were to be attained. Soviet citizens living through the ﬁrst decades of Soviet power were intensely aware of their duty to pos-sess a distinct individual biography , to present it publicly , and to workon themselves in search of self-perfection. Most important, they wereforced to acknowledge the political weight of their biography . Theintense politicization of acts of talking and writing about oneself alsoinﬂuenced the writing of diaries in the 1930s – the actual source bodyinvestigated in this essay .
As a textual genre, the diary , along with other autobiographical nar-
ratives, was markedly shaped by the Soviet Revolution. In prerevolu-tionary times, writing an account of one’s life or keeping a journal waslimited to a relatively small segment of educated Russian society . Fol-lowing the Revolution of 1917, the autobiographical domain expandeddramatically , both in absolute numbers and in sociological terms. It wasnot just that many more individuals became engaged in writing andtalking about themselves but that the autobiographical domain reachedentirely new layers of the population, thereby creating a new, speciﬁ-cally Soviet, subgenre of sorts: of authors groping for a language of self-STALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 185
2Stefan Plaggenborg recently formulated this view from a cultural anthropologi-
cal standpoint in “Grundprobleme der Kulturgeschichte der sowjetischen Zwischenkriegszeit,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas 48 (2000), no. 1:109–18, esp.
115–16. See also Moshe Lewin’s earlier notion of the Stalinist “ ‘quicksand’ society” ( The
Making of the Soviet System: Essays in the Social History of Interwar Russia [New York,
1985], 221). The loss of the self is also a central theme in Hannah Arendt’s analysis oftotalitarian regimes, The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951, rev . edn., New York, 1973).
3When talking about the self-creating effects of the Russian Revolution, I certainly do
not want to imply that selves, as self-conscious beings, did not exist prior to the Revolu-tion. My argument is rather that the Revolution deployed on a massive scale a new think-ing about the self as both a problem and a political project. For a model of this approachto the self as a problem see Michel Foucault, The History of Sexuality , vol. 1, An Introduc-
tion (New York, 1978), chap. 1; ibid., vol. 2, The Use of Pleasure (New York, 1985), 
introduction.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
expression at the same time as they learned to read and write.4The Civil
War accounts by Isaak Babel and Andrei Platonov indulge in recordingthe awkward, earnest, and intense attempts by barely literate peasant-soldiers to cast themselves as revolutionary subjects.
5
In part this obsessive talk about the self was a direct offshoot of the
Revolution, an immediate articulation of the revolutionary ideas ofhuman liberation, social emancipation, and the dignity of the person-ality , all of which had made an explosive appearance in 1917.
6But it is
important to consider how this humanistic discourse was from thebeginning appropriated by the Soviet regime and thus integrated intoan agenda of individual activation and mobilization in the service ofstrengthening the revolutionary state. With its stress on subjectiveinvolvement in the revolutionary cause, the Bolshevik regime was pursuing a quintessentially modern agenda of subjectivization , of foster-
ing conscious citizens who would become engaged in the program ofbuilding socialism of their own will.
7Soviet revolutionaries sought 
to remove all mediation between the individual citizen and the largercommunity , so that the consciousness of the individual and the revo-lutionary goals of the state would merge. In the process, individualswere expected to refashion their very selves, by enacting revolutions 186 JOCHEN HELLBECK
4Bibliographic evidence as well as what is known on state-sponsored efforts at autobio-
graphical writing suggest that – both numerically and in terms of sociological breadth –the early Soviet regime engendered the largest collective autobiographical project under-taken in modern history . Only the Chinese Communist case may have rivalled the Sovietautobiographical project in terms of the sheer number of individual autobiographiessponsored by the regime. For a bibliography of published autobiographical material relat-ing to the Soviet period see the ongoing publication project, Sovetskoe obshchestvo v
vospominaniiakh i dnevnikakh: Annotirovannyi bibliograﬁcheskii ukazatel’ knig, publikatsii vsbornikakh i zhurnalakh, ed. V . Z. Drobizhev , 4 vols. (Moscow, 1987–95). The production
of autobiographical literature increased signiﬁcantly after 1917 (“Memuarnaia liter-atura,” in Literaturnaia entsiklopediia , vol. 7 [Moscow, 1934], cols. 131–49). The popu-
larity of the diary genre in Soviet Russia is underscored by a bibliography of recentjournal publications of archival documentations, which lists more than two hundreddiaries or diary excerpts. See Otkrytyi arkhiv: Spravochnik opublikovannykh dokumentov po
istorii Rossii XX-go veka iz gosudarstvennykh i semeinykh arkhivov (po otechestvennoi peri-odike 1985–1995 gg.) , ed. I. A. Kondakova (Moscow, 1997).
5See Isaak Babel, Red Cavalry (New York, 1929); and Andrei Platonov , Chevengur (Paris,
1972).
6Mark Steinberg, “The Language of Popular Revolution,” in V oices of Revolution, 1917
(New Haven, 2001). The humanist theme is strongly expressed in Maxim Gorky’s serial-ized commentary in Untimely Thoughts: Essays on Revolution, Culture, and the Bolsheviks,
1917–1918 (New York, 1968).
7The ethos of social activation associated here with the Soviet regime was in fact already
implemented in the course of World War I. But the Bolsheviks’ approach was distinct inthat they transposed the spirit of total wartime mobilization to postwar conditions andintroduced a much broader set of practices to realize this goal. See Peter Holquist, “ ‘Infor-mation is the Alpha and Omega of Our Work’: Bolshevik Surveillance in Its Pan-European Context,” Journal of Modern History 69 (September 1997): 415–50.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
of their souls, paralleling the revolutions of the social and political 
landscapes.
What made this discourse of rearing conscious revolutionary 
subjects so potent was the fact that it was actualized through a host ofsubjectivizing practices , including political agitation, educational policies,
and reeducational measures aiming at “reforging” class aliens. EvenGulag camps, staffed with large libraries and other educational facilities,were conceived of as construction sites of the New Man. Within thistransformative framework, the Soviet state attached particular signiﬁ-cance to the practice of autobiographical writing and speaking, both asa manifestation of the state of consciousness a given individual hadachieved, and as a tool of raising this consciousness further. The mostwidespread type of formalized self-presentation in the Soviet system wasthe avtobiograﬁia – a short account of an individual’s life, submitted in
prose and presented orally , listing this person’s educational and profes-sional achievements, but in its core focusing on the formation of his orher personality . This form of self-presentation originated in the Com-munist party milieu as a means of assessing a given candidate’s level ofpolitical consciousness. Yet, it was practiced also in the Komsomol andin nonparty institutions, such as universities and organs of state admin-istration. In applying for membership in one of these institutions, anyapplicant had to compose and recite such an autobiography .
8Signiﬁ-
cantly , Soviet citizens were required to resubmit their autobiography atrecurrent intervals throughout their lives. It is therefore safe to assumethat individuals were familiar not only with this genre of self-presenta-tion and its attendant rules but also with the underlying assumptionthat their biographies were subject to rewriting, in accordance with theprogression of the Revolution along with the development of their own,subjective political consciousness.
During the ﬁrst decades of Soviet power, state and party agencies also
poured considerable energy into the production of large-scale autobio-graphical projects involving thousands of Soviet citizens.
9Workers andSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 187
8On the poetics of self-fashioning in Soviet autobiographies see Igal Halﬁn, “From Dark-
ness to Light: Student Communist Autobiography During NEP ,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte
Osteuropas 45 (1997), no. 2:210–36. The genre of the Soviet autobiography bears strik-
ing parallels to the Puritan mode of self-constitution, as at least once in their lives allPuritan converts were required to write and publicly recite their own spiritual histories.These autobiographical texts were shaped against the texts of predecessors and fellowbelievers (“To be a pilgrim was to travel in the ‘Way’ of such texts within the Puritanculture”; Kathleen M. Swaim, Pilgrim’s Progess, Puritan Progress: Discourses and Contexts
[Urbana, 1993], 137).
9S. V . Zhuravlev , Fenomen “Istorii fabrik i zavodov”: Gor’kovskoe nachinanie v kontekste
epokhi 1930-kh godov (Moscow, 1997); Frederick Corney , “History , Memory , Identity and
the Construction of the Bolshevik Revolution, 1917–1927” (Ph.D. diss., Columbia University , 1997), esp. 273–8, 316–20.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
soldiers wrote their recollections of the Revolution of 1917, and labor
collectives in various branches of Soviet industry narrated the epic taleof their construction campaign at the Stalinist “industrialization front.”In all of these cases the plot operated on two levels, relating how indi-viduals made the Revolution, constructed a factory , built the Metro, and
so on, and at the same time, how they themselves were made by the 
Revolution and how they were forged as subjects in the course of the 
Stalinist industrialization drive. This twofold theme was especially pro-nounced in the case of class enemies, criminals, and social outcasts,who were to be reforged into conscious and socially useful citizensthrough the combined tools of labor and autobiographical writing.Their accounts of their lives describe the full trajectory of self-transformation, from “human weed” or “bad raw material,” living in asimilarly unformed or polluted social environment, to conscious, self-disciplined beings residing in the well-ordered socialist garden createdto an extent by themselves.
10
Alongside other autobiographical genres, Soviet revolutionaries also
promoted the diary as a subjectivizing technique. Consider the case ofthe “Red Army notebook” ( knizhka krasnoarmeitsa ) of the Civil War
period, a booklet designed for each individual Red Army soldier, for thesake of recording the ammunition, food, and clothing supplies distrib-uted to him. The booklet contains a blank page at the end bearing theheading “for personal notes.” A caption below reads: “If possible, keepa diary of your service in the Workers’ and Peasants’ Red Army .”
11Yet
notwithstanding this glaring case, the diary never received the sameofﬁcial support as the production of complete autobiographical narra-tives.
12Soviet activists were deeply ambivalent about how suitable the
diary was as a catalyst of socialist self-transformation. They acknowl-188 JOCHEN HELLBECK
10See the ﬁnal chapter, “Gorky sums up,” in Belomor: An Account of the Construction of
the New Canal between the White Sea and the Baltic Sea (New York, 1935); and A. S.
Makarenko, The Road to Life: an Epic of Education (Moscow, 1951 ). The highest form of
subjectivity , however, the role of progenitor of the New Soviet Man, was reserved forStalin himself, who was likened to “a gardener rearing his beloved fruit tree.” See “Otch-etnyi doklad tov . Molotova o rabote pravitel’stva VII S ≤ezdu Sovetov SSSR,” Pravda , 29
January 1935. On the “gardener” and the “gardening state” see also Zygmunt Bauman,Modernity and the Holocaust (Ithaca, 1989), 13, 71, 91–92.
11Knizhka krasnoarmeitsa (Ekaterinoslav , 1919). I thank Peter Holquist for pointing out
this source to me.
12Compare the case of seventeenth-century New England, where prescriptions on diary-
keeping were central to the production and dissemination of the revolutionary , Puritanself (Charles E. Hambrick-Stowe, The Practice of Piety: Puritan Devotional Disciplines in 
Seventeenth-Century New England [Chapel Hill, 1982]). For the scattered initiatives of
Soviet pedagogues, psychologists, and literary activists to mobilize the introspective and self-transformative powers of the diary in their efforts to create the New Man, seechapter two of my forthcoming Revolution of the Soul: Diaries from the Stalin Era .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
edged that the diary had traditionally served as an inherently bourgeois
medium that tended to further individuals’ selﬁsh, narcissistic drives, orat best produced “empty talk.” There was also the suspicion that a diary ,if written on one’s own and concealed from the gaze of the collective,could undermine a Communist’s socialist consciousness and become abreeding ground of counterrevolutionary sentiment.
13This suspicion
was poignantly expressed in the fact that diaries were among the mate-rials most coveted by NKVD ofﬁcers during searches of apartmentsbelonging to “enemies of the people.” Some literary specialists expressednot so much suspicion, but rather disdain toward the diary medium:they expressly favored the production and publication of memoirs overdiaries because the memoir had the educational advantage of present-ing a cohesive. uniﬁed narrative of self-development. The diary narra-tive, by contrast, was choppy and resonated with competing voices inthe process of self-constitution. The memoir represented a ﬁnished pieceof work – it was a monument of the completed self, whereas the diaryfunctioned as a mere construction site of the self, conceived of as a work-in-progress.
14As a disillusioned literary editor in charge of publishing a
collection of workers’ self-narratives put it: “[Diaries] can give greatresults, yet these results won’t come overnight. The diary demands time,but we need material now .”
15
It is important to bear ofﬁcial ambiguities toward the diary in mind
when studying the existing diary literature of the 1930s, since such aperspective allows us to understand these diaries as far more than anunmediated product of Soviet state policies of subjectivization. Only ina few cases did diaries originate as clear assignments prescribed bySoviet ofﬁcials; for the most part, they were kept on the initiative of theirauthors, who in fact often deplored the absence of ofﬁcial precepts ofSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 189
13Oleg Kharkhordin, “Reveal and Dissimulate: A Genealogy of Private Life in Soviet
Russia,” in Public and Private in Thought and Practice , ed. Jeff Weintraub and Krishan
Kumar (Chicago, 1994). In Ilia Erenburg’s novel, Second Day (Den’ vtoroi ), it is the chief
villain, Vasia Safonov , who keeps a diary shielded from the collective, to which he con-ﬁdes his counterrevolutionary thoughts. Transposed to real life, the same scenario couldbe observed in the case of Kirov’s murderer, Leonid Nikolaev , whose diary the state pros-ecution used to provide evidence for his anti-Soviet disposition (Robert Conquest, The
Great Terror , 56). To counter possible individualistic effects of diary-keeping and foster
the development of a collectivist consciousness, Soviet pedagogues also assigned collec-tively kept “brigade diaries” in factories and schools. The Nazi regime in Germany pro-duced a racialized version of the collective diary , with Nazi ideologues calling for thewriting of “clan diaries” ( Tagebuch der Sippe ), from which future generations were to
“draw power and knowledge and obtain insights into the character and fate of their bloodrelatives ( Blutsverbundenen )” (Peter Boemer, Tagebuch [Stuttgart 1969]).
14“Memuarnaia literatura,” 132.
15Josette Bouvard, “Le moi au miroir de la société nouvelle: Les formes autobi-
ographiques de l’histoire” (unpublished ms.), 85.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
self-transformation according to which they could pattern their lives.
An investigation of this diary literature thus highlights the extent towhich individuals, acting on their own, creatively wove themselves intoa loose matrix of subjectivization produced by the Revolution, and howthese individuals themselves supplied some of the core categories andmechanisms of self-realization in a Soviet vein.
The following discussion presents a sample from a large pool of
diaries from the 1930s, most of which have become available toresearchers following the opening of the Soviet archives. The diaristscover a broad occupational and sociological spectrum, and they includeboth urban and rural residents, members of all generations, men andwomen.
16The discussion is broken down into three parts. I begin by
focusing on diaries as chronicles of socialist construction, before movingto an investigation of the introspective and self-transformative functionsof Stalin-era diaries. The third section places Soviet diaries and notionsof Soviet subjectivity in relationship to the binary concept of the publicand the private sphere.
17
Excluded from the present investigation are diaries lacking an auto-
biographical orientation. This essay thus does not explore the diaristic190 JOCHEN HELLBECK
16The sociological breadth and variegated textual nature of the corpus of diaries on
which this study is based (totalling about one hundred) deﬁes simple classiﬁcation. It issafe to say , though, that the majority of the diaries were written by members of a youngergeneration (authors born between 1895 and 1920). In terms of the provenance of thesediaries, a good number of them, authored by members of the state bureaucracy , or thetechnical and artistic intelligentsia, had been deposited in Soviet state archives and beenaccessible to researchers already before the collapse of the Soviet Union. Others, belong-ing to the same group of people, had been locked away in spetskhrany until the late 1980s.
A third group of diaries is derived from nonstate archives established during the pere-stroika period (for example, Memorial and the Narodnyi arkhiv) or from private archives.Numerically , diaries from the latter two groups prevail strongly . Although impressive innumber, these diaries scratch only the surface of the total of surviving diaries from theearly Stalin period. The greatest as of yet untapped repositories of diaries from the 1930sare the central and regional archives of the KGB, to which foreign researchers still havevirtually no access. Innumerable other diaries are preserved in private householdsthroughout the post-Soviet territory . There is reason to fear that many diaries from theearly Soviet period might get lost or never be made available to researchers, for the simplereason that their current owners are unaware of the historical signiﬁcance of this genre.For a detailed survey of diaries from the 1930s see Hellbeck, Revolution of the Soul , chap.
3. Several of these previously unknown diaries from the 1930s have already been pub-lished in the West. See especially Véronique Garros et al., eds., Intimacy and Terror: Soviet
Diaries of the 1930s (New York, 1995); and Jochen Hellbeck, ed., Tagebuch aus Moskau
1931–1939 (Munich, 1996).
17Given space constraints, the important themes of critical opinion, repression, and self-
censorship in diaries from the 1930s, as well as the relationship between autobiographi-cal writing and Stalinist terror cannot be dealt with in the present article. These issuesare discussed in Hellbeck, Revolution of the Soul .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
genre as a whole, nor does it set itself the goal of deducing from diaris-
tic texts how their authors actually experienced the Stalin period. This latter point needs to be stressed, in view of the intuitive populartendency to view the diary as an experiential sanctuary of sorts, as arepository of individuals’ innermost thoughts and feelings. Yet no auto-biographical text, however intimate and confessional it claims to be, isable to provide an immediate answer to the question of experience. Self-narratives can be fully understood only if situated in the context of his-torically speciﬁc conventions of how to conceive of oneself and presentoneself. With respect to the Stalin era, this context was shaped by thelanguage of the Russian Revolution, the rise of a new mode of univer-sal self-expression, the politicization of the self in the wake of 1917, andthe totalizing insistence on universal self-transformation and self-disclosure on the part of the Soviet regime. This frame goes a long wayto explaining why the self is such a prominent theme in Stalin-eradiaries and why there is a remarkable scarcity of non-Soviet modes ofself-realization in these texts. Not all diaries from the 1930s are autobi-ographical in character, but to the extent that they invoke the self, mostof them move within distinctly Soviet parameters of selfhood, by stress-ing the themes of work on the self, social utility and integration, andhistorical orientation. 
Chronicles of Socialist Construction
Soviet diaries from the 1930s bespeak an extraordinary involvement of
their authors in the development of the Soviet system. Diarists wereoften aware of participating in an exceptional, historic period, which itwas their obligation to record. “When will I ﬁnally write my memoirsabout the 1930s?” one of them asked.
18The fact that this author posed
the question in 1932, when the actual “1930s” had barely begun, illus-trates how much there existed at the time a notion of the Stalinist indus-trialization campaign as a distinct epoch in the making. Another diarist,a party activist involved in the collectivization campaign, wrote hisautobiographical record as a chronicle of class struggle. He began tokeep the diary following his appointment as chairman of a villageSoviet. The ﬁrst entry summarizes his achievements at his former work-place, which had also been at the collectivization “front”: “There weremany victories and defeats. The class enemy , the kulak, did not sleep,organizing the backward mass of the bedniaki (poor peasants) and sered-
niaki (peasants of average means) against the kolkhozes. . . . Thus, in aSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 191
18Diary of Stepan Podlubnyi, entry of 2 September 1932, in Tagebuch aus Moskau , 92.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
bitter skirmish with the obsolete and dying capitalist elements, our
kolkhozes have been born, reared, and strengthened. A lot of strugglestill lies ahead, especially at the new location, the Pirogov village Soviet,where I have been transferred by the district committee of the party .”
19
Tellingly the narrator begins by setting up a macro frame, the collec-tivization campaign in the Soviet countryside, in which he then placesevents from his own personal life. The same strategy is visible in thediary of Masha Scott, who expands the ideological frame structuring thenarration of her personal life to its utmost extent – the epic of interna-tional class struggle. Masha Scott, one of the builders of the city ofMagnitogorsk, related in her diary her ﬁrst encounter with John Scott, a visiting American engineer, whom she would later marry . Shedescribed how disappointed she felt upon seeing this fabled Americanvisitor in person – an emaciated young man, dressed in rags and covered with blast-furnace dust:
The ﬁrst American I had ever seen, he looked like a homeless boy ( bezpri-
zornik ). I saw in him the product of capitalist oppression. I saw in my
mind’s eye his sad childhood; I imagined the long hours of inhuman laborwhich he had been forced to perform in some capitalist factory while stilla boy; I imagined the shamefully low wages he received, only sufﬁcient tobuy enough bread so that he could to go work the next day; I imaginedhis fear of losing even this pittance and being thrown on the streets unem-ployed in case he was unable to do his work to the satisfaction and proﬁtof his parasitic bosses.
20
Ideological tenets, in the sense of projections of a world to be realized,
also informed diaries that were produced explicitly as chronicles ofeveryday life ( byt). Nikolai Zhuravlev , an archivist from Kalinin, began
his diary with the following introductory remark:
I am a local historian ( kraeved ) and an archivist. I know the signiﬁcance
for the historian of a document which deals with the everyday . I under-stand that a document, an ordinary document ﬁled in an ofﬁce, narratesprimarily about extraordinary facts and remains silent about all that hasﬁrmly become an attainment of everyday life ( byt). Which ofﬁce will
describe for you a normal day in the life of a normal person? . . . This is
why , in support of the historian of the city of Kalinin (the future will tellwhether this will be myself or someone else), I have decided to begin these192 JOCHEN HELLBECK
19“1933–1936 gg. v griazovetskoi derevne (Dnevnik A. I. Zhelezniakova),” 
V ologda: Istoriko-kraevedcheskii al’manakh , vyp. 1 (Vologda, 1994), 455, entry of 30 May
1933.
20John Scott, Behind the Urals. An American W orker in Russia’s City of Steel (1942;
enlarged ed., prepared by Stephen Kotkin [Bloomington, 1989]), 118–19.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
notes in which I will try , as far as possible, not to talk about the turns of
my heart, but will concentrate more on facts.21
Tellingly , the author’s purported desire to write a chronicle of everyday
life was motivated by an extraordinary event – the eight hundredthanniversary of the founding of Kalinin (Tver’): “The day on which mynotes begin is an extraordinary one in the chronicles of the city ....I t
is a big holiday ....Y o u  f eel this when you look at the faces of the people
walking by . Among them are many kolkhoz workers who have come tothe regional center to celebrate yet another victory of socialist agricul-ture.” The following day , Zhuravlev summarized his impressions aboutthe city festival: “Celebrations like this can take place only in the land ofsocialism! I remember these ofﬁcial ‘festivities’ under Tsarism. ...B u t
our holiday is a genuine mass holiday , a genuine holiday of thepeople.”
22
Zhuravlev’s diary project illustrates the political signiﬁcance of the
category of everyday life in the Soviet system. In view of the stated goal of the Bolshevik regime to revolutionize all aspects of the tradi-tional everyday , a diarist’s description of living conditions under Stalinism was a profoundly ideological gesture.
23It is in this light that
the following diary , of the Leningrad worker and student ArkadiiMan’kov , should be read. Man’kov’s account also focused on the bytof
the Stalin era, but it emphasized solely the misery and despondency suf-fered by the working population. Man’kov’s express purpose in keepinghis diary of the 1930s was diametrically opposed to Zhuravlev’s, as hesought to denounce the achievements claimed by the Stalinist regime.The contemporary social structure in the Soviet Union, Man’kov wrote,was “purely capitalist”; to refer to it as a Marxist state was blasphemous.All the while, however, Man’kov called for the realization of Marx’s revo-lutionary goals – the end of exploitation and the arrival of materialplenty . Like Zhuravlev , he referred to his diary as raw material for ahistory of the everyday life of the Stalin period that historians wouldhave to write one day , and as was also the case with Zhuravlev ,Man’kov’s account of the everyday was embedded in a vision of theSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 193
21Diary of Nikolai Zhuravlev , entry of 6 January 1936, in Gosudarstvennyi arkhiv
Kalininskoi oblasti, f. r-652, op. 1. ed. khr. 2.
22Ibid., entry of 7 January 1936. In spite of Zhuravlev’s intention to keep an impersonal
diary of everyday life in Kalinin, his chronicle did turn largely into a confessional genre,recording intrigues at the workplace and problems with his adulterous wife at home.
23On Soviet designs to revolutionize byt see Naiman, Sex in Public: The Incarnation 
of Early Soviet Ideology (Princeton, 1997), 185–8; Katerina Clark, Petersburg, Crucible of
Cultural Revolution (Cambridge, MA, 1995), 242–60; Michael David-Fox, Revolution of the
Mind: Higher Learning among the Bolsheviks, 1918–1929 (Ithaca, 1997); and Christina
Kiaer, “Boris Arvatov’s Socialist Objects,” October 81 (Summer 1997): 105–18.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
socialist society of the future.24In spite of their radically different diag-
noses, these two authors thus expressed themselves within a sharedhorizon of meaning deﬁned by the campaign of building socialism.
25
A diarist’s mention of extreme material hardship by itself did not
have to stand in the way of his or her ideological commitment. On thecontrary , Galina Shtange, a ﬁfty-year-old housewife married to a leadingSoviet engineer, deliberately mentioned the adverse conditions of con-temporary life in order to underscore the heroic sacriﬁce assumed byherself and her generation in the building of socialism.
It’s just horrible when you think about how people live these days, and
engineers in particular. I heard about one engineer, who lives with hiswife in a nine-[square-] meter room. When his mother came to visit, therewas absolutely no place for him to do his work. So he put the lamp on theﬂoor and lay down (on his stomach under the table) and worked that way ,he couldn’t put it off, he had a deadline. I wrote down this example so thatthose who come after us will read it and get a sense of what we wentthrough.
26
The unstated assumption motivating this entry was that future genera-
tions of Soviet citizens, living in a materially plentiful Communist world,would have difﬁculty imagining the hardships borne by those who sacriﬁced themselves for the building of this future.
The sense that a diary kept in the 1930s, to be legitimate, had to be
ideological in character, is also reﬂected in the laments of two diariststhat their chronicles failed to reach such a level of interpretation.Repeatedly the Komsomol activist Anatolii Ul’ianov voiced his frustra-tion at his own writings in his diary:
4/12/1933 I’ve just read through a couple of pages. How much empti-
ness, and how little reﬂection of life. The life about which people write194 JOCHEN HELLBECK
24A. G. Man’kov , “Dnevnik riadovogo cheloveka (1933–1934),” Zvezda , 1994, no. 6:
entries of 30 January and 24 July 1933. Man’kov later became a well-known historianof pre-Petrine Russia. He published, among other things, an acclaimed edition of the1649 Ulozhenie , Sobornoe ulozhenie 1649 goda: Tekst kommentarii , ed. A. G. Man’kov
(Leningrad, 1987).
25In his diary , Ivan Sich, a retired schoolteacher of French, also focused on the hard-
ships of everyday life, contrasting them to the ideological proclamations of the Sovietregime. Sich especially made a point of recording the critical views of workers towardSoviet power, to discredit the latter’s claims for legitimacy . Unlike Man’kov , however, Sichdid not seem to be motivated by a personal vision of a better socialist world. See I. I. Sich,“Fragments du journal inédit d’Ivan Ivanovic ˇ Sitc ˇ,” Cahiers du monde russe et soviétique
28 (1987), no. 1:75–94; esp. entries of 7 November 1929 and “First days of June(1930).”
26Diary of Galina Shtange, in Intimacy and Terror , 167–218, entry of 1 January 1937.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
books. . . . They rear heroes. But what do I have? I will try to be more
detailed and more prosaic in writing about myself at home and at work.
5/7/1933 The end of the [diary] notebook is approaching. This notebook
spans almost eight months, i.e., two thirds of a year. But life is very incom-pletely illuminated. It is even very , very slightly illuminated. There are alot of thoughts in there, but little on the essence of existence.
Firmly intent on devoting his diary to the essence of life, Ul’ianov inter-
mittently produced a series of entries exclusively on his labor activities,summarizing production targets and results of the factory at which heworked, Komsomol meetings, and his work as a social activist.
27But he
soon fell back into his habitual diaristic mode again. As late as in 1937he complained:
1/15/1937 About the diary . What kind of stupid trumpery I have been
writing over the last days (no, all the time!) in my diary . There is no life init, only nonsense about womenfolk. From today on, I have decided to writeonly about what is real, what has happened as an accomplished fact, andI’ll discard the rest. Yeah, and my life is somehow petty; in my twenty-three years, I haven’t done anything intelligent, anything heroic; I’m onlygroping around like an idiot. A diary should reﬂect only the truth – live,heroic truth – but everything that I have written to date is some kind ofnonsense. Under no circumstances will I keep writing like this.
Especially intriguing in this entry is how Ul’ianov’s observation on the
trivial character of his diary notes brings him to conclude that he isleading a petty life. There seems to be hardly any difference in theauthor’s mind between “writing like this” and “living like this.” Theboundary between writing and actual life is blurred, and there is a palpable sense of the diary’s power to literally write its author’s life: themore disciplined and consistently heroicizing his autobiographical nar-rative unfolds, Ul’ianov implies, the more real and heroic his actual lifewill become.
Another diarist, the writer A. V . Peregudov , realized only from the dis-
tance of a quarter century that his diary project had failed. In an entryof 1961 he remarked:
It’s been almost twenty-ﬁve years that I haven’t opened this diary . I reread
my notes and was amazed about how petty they are. But where are allthe great things ( to velikoe ) that took place in our country , changing its
face and strengthening its might? My explanation for this is that the diarySTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 195
27Diary of Anatolii Ul’ianov , in Otdel rukopisei Rossiiskoi gosudarstvennoi biblioteki (OR
RGB), f. 442, op. 1, ed. khr. 10, entries of 20 May and 13 July 1933.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
was not destined for such a high purpose, but was kept for small, “inti-
mate and lyrical” notes which revolved only around my family life andnature and were of great interest only to myself and Mariia. How I regretnow that I did not keep a different, a great diary , devoted to the greatevents. I tried frequently , but I never wrote it.
28
How widely the diaristic genre was deployed for chronicles of social-
ist construction is also illustrated in the case of the numerous traveldiaries left behind by foreign visitors to the Soviet Union in the 1920sand 1930s. Whether enthusiastic or sceptical in their responses, theseauthors invariably shared an impulse to witness and record in their per-sonal chronicles the building of the New World.
29
Beyond their ideological nature, another remarkable feature of many
diaries from the 1930s is their emphasis on the narrator’s personalinvolvement in the development of the Soviet system. Vsevolod Vishnevskii, the playwright, wanted his diaristic record to serve as his-torical testimony , to be consulted by future generations to judge his ownand his contemporaries’ actions: “Our task is to preserve for history ourobservations, our present point of view – the point of view of the participant. You see, a year from now, or ten years from now, from theperspective of time, everything will become clearer. Possibly , there willbe another point of view, another judgment. Therefore let us leave for the grandsons and great-grandsons our story . Our mistakes and victories will be the lessons for tomorrow .”
30
The urge to write oneself into the Soviet revolutionary trajectory can
even be observed on the part of a potential victim of socialist construc-tion, notably the campaign to collectivize agriculture. The diarist,Tikhon Puzanov , was a peasant youth from the Don region, who wasstill living in his parents’ uncollectivized household in early 1933. Thefamily could not meet the grain delivery quotas mandated by the localSoviet and was threatened with expropriation and exile. While narrat-196 JOCHEN HELLBECK
28Diary of A. V . Peregudov , in Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi arkhiv literatury i iskusstva
(RGALI), f. 2211, op. 3, ed. khr. 18, entry of 8 April 1961. Peregudov’s diary notes ofthe 1930s are indeed redundant and shallow, consisting for the most part of weatherreports and minute descriptions of the author’s activities, particularly the types of foodand drinks consumed on a given day (“I slept ...g o t  u p...d r ank two cups of tea . . .
went to . . .”).
29For references to the extensive body of Western travellers’ descriptions of the emerg-
ing Soviet state see Paul Hollander, Political Pilgrims: W estern Intellectuals in Search of the
Good Society (New Brunswick, 1998), and Christiane Uhlig, Utopie oder Alptraum?
Schweizer Reiseberichte über die Sowjetunion, 1917–1941 (Zurich, 1992).
30Vsevolod Vishnevskii, Sobranie sochinenii v 5 tomakh, vol. 6, (Dopolnitel’nyi): 
Vystupleniia i radiorechi. Zapisnye knizhki. Pis’ma (Moscow, 1961), entry of 22 January
1942.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ing in the diary his and his family’s harsh “struggle for existence” under
the conditions of spreading famine, Puzanov also dreamt about thehappy future promised by collectivization, emphasizing his active personal involvement in the realization of this future:
All that I think about is how we will attain the happy future. Others think
in a contrary way – they wait for it to happen ( zhdut gotovogo ). And they
are the majority , they are not a bit interested in their work. They don’tcare about how they work, as if they were serving a sentence. They aren’tinvolved in the present world ( Oni ne zhivut nastoiashchim ). For them it is
all difﬁcult and torturous, since collective labor has not yet entered theconsciousness, the blood of the young; and the people are dreaming abouta smallholder’s existence ( mechtaiut o edinolichnoi zhizni ).
31
Although himself a member of a kulak family , Puzanov took part in the
collectivization campaign, joining activists’ raids on uncollectivizedpeasant households. On the pages of his diary he emphasized his“genuine loyalty to the kolkhoz system,” taking issue with those whosuspected that he was working in the kolkhoz only to “save [his] skin.”
32
Most tangibly the subjectivizing effect of revolutionary ideology – the
sense of the self coming to fruition through joining the socialist campaign – is evoked in case of the kolkhoz activist Aleksandr Zhelezniakov . On the occasion of the sixteenth anniversary of theOctober Revolution, he noted:
How good it is to feel, live, and win in struggle! There is not, there was
not, and there will not be in world history a generation more happy thanours. We are the participants in the creation of a new epoch! Do youremember, enemies, you who are encircling us from all sides, that onlytwenty years ago we were puny insects, crawling on the masters’ ﬂoors,and then this paltry person, strangled by capitalism, comprehendedhimself as a class and shattered the whole world to its foundations on 7November, sixteen years ago .... There is nothing greater than to be a
member, a citizen of the Soviet land and to belong to Lenin’s Communistparty , hardened in battles and led in our times by the beloved leader,STALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 197
31Tikhon Puzanov , “ ‘Zhatva’33-go goda,” Molodaia gvardiia , 1991, no. 5:207–8, entry
of 2 April 1933; see also entry of 1 January 1933).
32Ibid., entry of 6 January 1933 “Friday .” The notion of the diary as a work record and
expressive medium of self-realization is also present in the journal of the coal minerVladimir Molodtsov: “ 11/29/1930 The highest feeling that I could experience in my
short life, this is the feeling of being conscious of the fact that I am a part of the miners’collective. What a great thing not to notice, not to count the hours of the working day ,not to wait for the end of the shift, but instead to strive to prolong it ...a n d  a f t e r  t h e
shift, to leave as a victor in the fulﬁllment of the plan! How joyful it is to see oneself aheadof the others” ( Chelovek sredi liudei: Rasskazy, dnevniki, ocherki [Moscow, 1964], 161–91).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Comrade Stalin, with whom we are celebrating together today the day of
the great victories of technical progress. Had the October Revolution not
happened, could I have conceivably understood life in this way , and couldI have conceivably forgone my personal life for the struggle for commongoals? No! I would have remained a half-animal, but now I am happy . Iwas raised by Lenin’s party , and I have become ideologically hardened! Iam prepared to confront any difﬁculties and to bear any sacriﬁce in thename of the great goals of the building of the Communist society .
33
Logbooks of the Soviet Self
To be sure, passages like the one just quoted, celebrating the merging of
the self with the collective, appear to have been rare moments of raptureerupting from the generally less spectacular ﬂow of the diary narrative.More typical of Soviet diaries was a mode of doubt, insecurity , andintense self-criticism, coupled with admonishments not to give up workon oneself. In these cases the diary acted as a normalizing technique, amedium through which the mind observed and controlled psychic andbodily processes. The inward gaze provided by the diary enabled itsauthor to embark on an extended struggle in battling weaknesses andimpurities of the self.
A large number of diaries from the 1930s functioned as both records
and tools of psycho-physical training. They worked as an introspective,controlling, and regulating device, enabling their authors to monitorthe physiological and intellectual processes at work in them, in theservice of controlling and perfecting them. To document this self-transformative project, diarists repeatedly invoked the concepts of“planning,” “struggle,” and “consciousness,” core Communist values of the period, highlighted especially during the ﬁrst Five-Year Plans.
34
In her diary the young schoolteacher Vera Shtrom repeatedly voiced
the need to control and rationalize her life. She sought to achieve thisby analyzing her soul and bringing to light the realm of her “sub-conscious feelings.”
35Shtrom also conﬁded her dreams and fantasies, all
her “crazy” thoughts, to the diary , but expressly in a desire to “system-atize [her] impressions” and, ultimately , to live her life in “plan-like” and“systematic” fashion.
36Similarly , Anatolii Ul’ianov , a Moscow worker198 JOCHEN HELLBECK
33“1933–1936 gg. v griazovetskoi derevne,” 454–521, entry of 11 October 1933.
34Katerina Clark, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual (Chicago, 1981); Nathan Leites, A
Study of Bolshevism (Glencoe, IL, 1953).
35Diary of Vera Shtrom, in Tsentr dokumentatsii “Narodnyi arkhiv” (TsDNA), f. 336, op.
1, ed. khr. 32, entries of 31 July and 14 August 1930.
36Ibid., entries of 14 August 1930, and 5 May and 9 July 1931.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and Komsomol activist, mobilized the diaristic medium to bring order in
his life and increase his work performance:
I want to establish exact regulations of my money spending and daily
planning. I already did this today (it will be difﬁcult, but I’ll succeed). ButI want to introduce a planliness of work ( planovost’ raboty ) into my daily
life, for both my mental-physical and leisure [activities]. I will try to makemy work more manageable this way . Fewer of the usual tricks (walks withthe “perﬁdious” Katia, etc, etc.)
37
To ﬁght the “disorder in [her] soul,” which she repeatedly diagnosed in
her diary , the writer Vera Inber advocated what she called “ ‘techniciz-ing the soul’ ...i n  o t h e r  w ords, constructivism.” In keeping with this
mechanistic imagery she remarked elsewhere: “Man is a factory . Andhis mind is the director of this factory .”
38
Diarists established a variety of related dichotomies to describe the
composition of their self and the work attendant to change it. These binaries included the opposition between the mind and the body , individ-uals’ “ideology” and their “psychology ,” or, in the words of one diarist, his“will” and his “heart.”
39In all oppositional pairs the will played a central
role in the project to raise or remake the self. The will appeared as coterminous with an individual’s subjectivity . It was described as anautonomous power residing within the self that, once activated, raisedthe self to the level of a historical agent. In this context the diary func-tioned as a catalyst shaping and strengthening the diarist’s will.
Leonid Potemkin, a student at the Sverdlovsk Mining Institute,
repeatedly reﬂected in his diary on the duality of mind and body . Hedescribed how his mind, or conscious will, challenged and eventuallyovercame the sluggishness of the body , which hitherto was controlledby physiological, natural, and hence unconscious forces, thus enablinghim to merge with the laboring collective.
40
Vladimir Molodtsov , a coal miner, observed that his will (or ideology
– he used the two terms interchangedly) was engaged in a battle withhis “psychology”:
It is interesting how there is a lack of accordance between psychology and
ideology . Ideologically , I myself mobilized myself [sic] to catch up with theSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 199
37Diary of Anatolii Ul’ianov , entry of 23 March 1930. See also entries of 7 March 1936
and 4 May 1938.
38Vera Inber, Stranitsy dnei perebiraia ...:  I z  d n e v n i k o v  i  z a pisnykh knizhek , rev . ed.
(Moscow, 1977), entry of 9 July 1933.
39Chelovek sredi liudei , 161–91 (entry of 29 November 1930).
40Diary of Leonid Potemkin, in Intimacy and Terror , 251–92 (undated entry following
31 July 1935; see also entry marked “July 1936”).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
plan, and although I am working actively , my psychology still draws me
back home, to my hearth. This is evidenced by the increasing numbers ofdreams over the past two days, in which I saw my mother. But ideologywill raise psychology , this has to occur.
41
In the pages of his diary , Stepan Podlubnyi, a young Moscow worker
of kulak origins, elevated willpower to a moral ideal: “For a long timealready , I have liked people with a strong will. No matter who this personis, but if he or she has great willpower, this is a good person.”
42
Podlubnyi assiduously recorded all the instances when he felt that hisown willpower had increased,
43but for the most part, his diary was a
record of his failures – both at the work place and in his personal life –which Podlubnyi perceived to be rooted in his weak will.
44But for 
Podlubnyi, his diary amounted to more than a bulletin of the “sicknessof [his] will” (31 October 1935); writing in the diary was also a cure,since he reasoned that by forcing himself to write regularly he wouldalso increase his willpower (29 January 1933).
Willpower was attained through struggle. Diaries of the 1930s
abound in references to life as a continuous struggle. Aleksandr Zhelezniakov , the Vologda kolkhoz activist, described a hey harvestingcampaign conducted under his initiative. To take advantage of a briefspell of dry weather, he coerced the recalcitrant kolkhoz women workersinto staying in the ﬁeld until all work was ﬁnished:
We mowed until eleven at night, and the ﬁeld was mown. The moon
played a big role and helped me resolve this difﬁcult task. Thanks to theparty . It reared in me ﬁrmness and resolve in struggle, to win in the mostdifﬁcult conditions. What great happiness! Great, limitless happiness! Iremember the words of Marx and Engels: “Struggle is happiness!” Thenext morning it rained again.
45
In their journals, diarists waged struggle not just against an Other –
recalcitrant kolkhoz workers, or the forces of nature – but also againstthemselves. Ul’ianov once noted in his diary that he had alreadyimproved somewhat in terms of his manners and his education. But heremained critical about certain aspects of his personality: “In spite ofmy literacy , sometimes it is scandalous how coarse I am. Of course Idon’t want to turn into a sickly-sweet intellectual ( slashchaven’kii 200 JOCHEN HELLBECK
41Chelovek sredi liudei , 171 (entry from 17 November 1930).
42Tagebuch aus Moskau , 147 (entry from 5 January 1938).
43Ibid., 122–3, 125–6, 154 (entries of 10 March and 1 April 1933, and 16 April 1934).
44Ibid., 95–6, 118, 182, 198, 203–4 (entries of 6 October 1932, 8 February 1933, 27
December 1934, and 28 March and 30 September 1935).
45“1933–6 gg. v griazovetskoi derevne” (entry of 12 October 1935).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
intelligent ). But what I want to be is not to be an animal.” The entry con-
cluded with the resolution: “Struggle against coarseness, inconstancy ,and lies” (9 December 1932). Or, to cite from Podlubnyi’s diary: “I don’tknow where, I think it was Gorky who said that ‘life is a struggle.’ A veryapt observation. A life without struggle – that is not the life of a humanbeing, it’s an animal’s life. As far as I can remember about myself, all ofmy life has evolved as an inner, emotional struggle” (2 May 1933).
So far our discussion has focused on the role of the diary as a self-
disciplining technique. Yet, some of these diary narratives also evolve ina spiritual register. They describe a movement directed toward self-renewal, a movement proceeding rarely in a straight line, and moreoften as an uneven process marked by intense struggle. The speciﬁc roleof the diary in staging this journey of self-becoming is expressed in thecase of the playwright Aleksandr Aﬁnogenov , who referred to the dailyentries of his journal as “strict roadmarks of every single day that I have lived” (7 October 1937). One of Aﬁnogenov’s principal goals in keeping a diary was the production of a visible trace of self-development. Interrupting this journey was tantamount for him to aretraction into his present, imperfect self. To this extent, reviewing past diary entries enabled Aﬁnogenov to monitor and sustain hisjourney toward salvation:
11/16/1937 Right now, toda y...I  g o t  u p  w i t h  t h e  desire to somehow
move on: not to stop THINKING and ACCUMULATE what I’ve alreadybegun to accumulate, always LOOKING BACK and EXAMINING MYSELF ,NOT ALLOWING MYSELF TO BECOME MY FORMER SELF , if even only atiny bit.
Elsewhere Aﬁnogenov vowed never to
rest content with myself and my road. LOOK UP YOUR NOTES MOREOFTEN, look up the pages written on days of expectation and reevalua-tion of yourself. May what you wrote back then serve you as a PERMA-NENT REMINDER. Never depart from these notes (always collate themand and check: what you wrote comes from the very depths of yourheart’s sensitivity) ( 11/6/1937 ).
46
The sense that life for a citizen living in the Soviet system evolved as a
journey is also graphically expressed in the autobiography of HeinrichVogeler, a German Communist who emigrated to the Soviet Union in the1930s and wrote a memoir, titled “Becoming” ( W erden ), shortly before
his death in 1942. In a diary note of that period, Vogeler explained hisSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 201
46RGALI, f. 2172, op. 3. ed. khr. 5.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
principal purpose in writing this autobiography: “Perhaps this book will
be read by people who are looking for paths to reach the new life. Mystory will allow them to recognize wanderings which they can avoid forthemselves.”
47
As these last examples illustrate especially well, Soviet diaries 
from the 1930s were characterized not just by an agenda of self-transformation but also more basically , by a quest for self-expression.Expression, not repression, appears to be the principal theme of diaryself-narratives from the period. The desire to fuse with the collective, tosecure integration in Communist, collectivist values, was not a self-effacing dynamic, it did not diminish the private self, but on the con-trary , allowed it to grow .
Public and Private
Historians of the Soviet system often assume that only privately voiced
statements are reliable indicators of individuals’ “real” beliefs. Theytherefore endow the diary , understood as a private record par excellence,with a unique potential to express the individual self in undistortedfashion. Accordingly , diaries originating in the public realm – such asproduction or brigade diaries, or records written for the public eye – aredismissed as inauthentic records, especially in view of the pressuresapplied by the Soviet state which forced diarists to practice self-censorship. Yet, this exclusive correlation of the authentic self with theprivate sphere would leave researchers with preciously few “real” diariesto work with. Moreover, such a rigorous selection would risk missing the essential meaning of the diary in the context of the Stalinist order.
Our discussion thus far has shown that many diaries from the 1930s
were kept as work projects of the self. Particularly in the case of classaliens, the desire was great to eventually publish their individualaccounts of self-transformation, as visible proof, to others and to themselves, that they had successfully reworked themselves. StepanPodlubnyi, the son of a kulak who lived in Moscow and tried to becomea New Soviet Man, already knew the title of the autobiographical novel,which he was to produce from his diary notes: “The Life of an OutlivedClass, its Spiritual Rebirth and Adaptation to New Conditions.”
48The
writers Marietta Shaginian and Vera Inber, both of impure, non-Sovietorigins and therefore threatened with social marginalization, published202 JOCHEN HELLBECK
47Werner Hohmann, Heinrich V ogeler in der Sowjetunion 1931–1942: Daten-Fakten-
Dokumente (Fischerhude, 1987), 97.
48Stepan Podlubnyi, diary entry of 25 September 1934, in Tagebuch aus Moskau , 92.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
their diaristic accounts of self-transformation during their lifetimes.49
Although the published versions of the diaries were censored, this does
not mean that the diary manuscripts themselves were kept as publish-able records. Quite to the contrary , Podlubnyi was painfully aware thatmany passages in his diary would cost him dearly if they were to berevealed to state organs, but he still believed that one day censorshipwould be eased and his memoir would see the light of day (25 September 1934). His diary was at the same time an account of self-transformation addressed to the public, as well a secret “soulmate,” towhom he conﬁded the problems encountered while seeking to transformhimself. A number of other diarists kept their self-records secretly , whilesimultaneously entertaining thoughts of literary publications to bebased on the diary material. Thus, multiple diverging impulses appearto be at work in these diaries, making it extremely difﬁcult to categorizethem as private, semiprivate, or public records.
It is standard practice among literary theorists to treat the private 
literary voice as a ﬁctional device. Even the most privately conceived self is staged, using available discursive conventions, as soon as it entersthe literary realm.
50Rather than inferring a private, and by implication,
authentic, self from a given diary , it would more fruitful to deﬁne thediary in terms of a genre of private discourse, as a medium throughwhich diarists could cultivate – rather than simply express – a privateself. But complicating the issue further is the problem of employing thenotion of the private for analytical purposes in the context of the Sovietstate which regarded it as one of its principal tasks to eliminate all tracesof the bourgeois order, chief among them the public-private division. Inthe eyes of Soviet Marxists, bourgeois privacy was a beguiling yet utterlydisingenious concept which promised individual self-realization, but infact only deceived the working class over the state of its social alienation.Once the illusory fusion of the individual with the partial private spherepropagated by the bourgeois order was broken up, the formerlyoppressed subjects would regain their nature as social beings. Theirinner being and outer function would become one.
51
Keeping in mind the particular status of the private realm in a
Marxist state, it may be useful to consider the categories employed bySoviet diarists themselves to conceptualize their social existence, ratherthan to distinguish a priori between private or public spheres and STALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 203
49Marietta Shaginian, Dnevniki 1917–1931 (Leningrad, 1932); Inber, Stranitsy dnei
perebiraia .
50Manfred Jurgensen, Das ﬁktionale Ich: Untersuchungen zum Tagebuch (Bern, 1979), 7–8;
Andrew Hassam, Writing and Reality: A Study of Modern British Diary Fiction (Westport,
1993), 4, 8, 51.
51Henry J. Koren, Marx and the Authentic Man (Pittsburgh, 1967), 114.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
purposes of diary-writing. To begin with the case of Galina Shtange, a
ﬁfty-year-old housewife who joined the newly founded movement ofhousewife activists, “Obshchestvennitsa,” in 1936, her diary shows aninversion of the hierarchy of the public and private spheres found inliberal thought.
52Liberal discourse represents family life as the princi-
pal domain of the private. It is the realm of the individual’s unfetteredself-realization, outside of the encroachments of market relations andstate authority . While also contrasting her family existence to the publicsphere, Shtange, however, sought individual fulﬁllment in the latter.Torn between her duties as a housewife and a social activist, betweenthe exigencies of her family and the Revolution, she subordinated theformer to the latter.
53This is how she described her ﬁrst enrollment in
the Soviet women’s movement: “ 5/13/1936 I was sitting at home, pre-
occupied with my own narrow little family affairs, when Zabelina cameover and invited me to take part in an informal meeting with severalother ladies from the Commissariat of Communication and Trans-portation who wanted to join the movement. Naturally I agreed.” A fewmonths later, already an activist, she complained that her family prevented her from realizing herself: “ 8/27/1936 So much for my 
community work! ...I  w a s  completely engrossed in my work for two
months. I found my element and felt wonderful, in spite of being so tired.. . . So I decided to give up the work that I love so much, and take upcooking, dishwashing, and diapers again.” And in her summary of thatyear she decried her need for a “personal life”:
12/27/1936 The year is drawing to a close. It was a painful one for me.
The family is upset that I spend so little time at home. I’m sorry for them,but what can I do? I’m not old yet, I still want to have a personal life. Nowthat I’ve fulﬁlled my obligations to my family , in the few years that remainto me I want to live for myself , I will always be sincerely glad to help them
(emphasis added).
Shtange represented the private–public divide in the form of two 
different self-trajectories. Her narrow, petty household duties stood inthe way of the self-realization she hoped to achieve by serving the Revolution. Seen in his light, Shtange’s diary , which is almost exclu-sively a record of her public activities, emerges as a catalyst of her Sovietself. In 1938, forced to give up her work as an activist and return to thehousehold, she observed that she had “suddenly aged by many years.”
54204 JOCHEN HELLBECK
52Diary of Galina Shtange, in Intimacy and Terror , 167–218.
53On the reversal of gender roles in and following the Soviet Revolution see Elizabeth
Wood, The Baba and the Comrade (Bloomington, 1997).
54Diary of Galina Shtange, in Intimacy and Terror , entry of 2 April 1938.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The implication was that working for the Revolution had a rejuvenat-
ing effect. “Our work should be joyful, it’s only natural,” Shtange notedelsewhere in her diary . “Man is a social animal. He can be happy andjoyful only in a collective. Leave a man alone, even in a golden palace,and his joy for living will just fade and die. Only an awareness of his use-fulness to society can bring joy and satisfaction.”
55The statement
Shtange makes about herself applies to her diary as well: preciselybecause she cannot remain alone cut off from the collective, her diary ,in so far as it is to reﬂect her sense of self, cannot possibly remain a fullyprivate record. It has to be devoted to public life to be signiﬁcant and sat-isfying. In this light it appears only logical that Shtange pasted herdiaries with numerous newsclippings, other documents from the publicworld, as if to underscore that her personal voice could come to fruitiononly in the frame of the Soviet collective.
56Shtange’s case thus illus-
trates once more that self-expression in the Soviet context does not standin the way of, but on the contrary thrives on, public deeds and texts.
Stepan Podlubnyi conceptualized the relation between the private
and the public realm in terms of an inner and an outer self. In his diaryhe often mentioned the feelings of his “inside” ( vnutrennost’ ), using this
expression synonymously with his “soul” ( dusha ). His goal was to acti-
vate the inner self so that it would merge with the revolutionary agendaof the Soviet state. As he understood it, the soul of a Soviet citizen wasto be ﬁlled with a distinctly political spirit and should form a realm ofenthusiasm. He was dissatisﬁed when noticing that “all the inside (was)asleep” or when he felt himself to be in an “idiotic and nonpoliticalmood” (7 June 1932).
To be sure, Podlubnyi did develop a distinct notion of the private, 
and he identiﬁed this sphere with parts of his diary . The diary repre-sented his “only friend,” the only partner to whom he conﬁded thosethoughts that he knew would be dangerous to voice to anybody else,even to close friends. But he regarded these thoughts to be illegitimate.He possessed no positive notion of a private sphere in which to anchora sense of self and personal values diverging from the public norms. HeSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 205
55This passage, from a speech given by Shtange to the wives of commanders in the
Transport Sector, follows her diary entry of 27 December 1936.
56My view of this diary as a coherent agenda of self-expression departs from the inter-
pretation made by the editors of Shtange’s diary , who stress the disparate nature of thevarious sources – diary entries, newspaper clippings, letters, photographs, and the like –making up this “diary-herbarium,” and who view the actual diary as a composite ofinterwoven “codes in which the subject moves forward and unravels, like a spider thatdissolves itself in its own web” ( Intimacy and Terror , 168–9). In my view, this interpreta-
tion overstates the formal differences between the various textual and visual genresinvolved in the diary , and by the same token it underrates the existential meaning at stakefor authors like Shtange in the production of these self-records.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
therefore did not conceive of his diary as a record of a private sphere to
be remembered. Rather, it served him as a “rubbish heap” onto whichhe could discard all the “garbage” accumulating in his mind (23January 1933). He envisioned writing as a struggle from which hewould ultimately emerge cleansed, fully identical with public values andthereby unencumbered of any alternative selﬁsh, and hence impure,private sphere.
Stalin-era journals are replete with private thoughts – private in the
sense of being conﬁdential and certainly not written for the public eye– but more often than not their authors viewed them as expressions ofweakness, as tokens of their lack of willpower, yet not as a source ofpride or a kernel of their selfhood. The public–private binary is thus notvery helpful for an understanding of Soviet subjectivities if we assumethe private realm to be the exclusive locus of positive identity . As such,privacy has no obvious meaning. It aquires positive or negative valencedepending on the discourse in which the self articulates itself. In theSoviet case, given the radically public and collectivist ethos promoted bythe revolutionary state, it may be not so surprising after all that practi-cally none of the 1930s diaries known to me were kept to cultivate aprivate existence in distinction from the public sphere. The type of self-realization pursued by diarists was to be reached through techniques ofpuriﬁcation and remaking the self. Rather than using the dichotomy of private and public, diarists situated their personal, and particular,existence with respect to the general public interest. These descriptionsevoke two trajectories – the life of the individual and the life of the col-lective – which were ideally to merge into a single whole. Time andagain, diarists wrote of their efforts to merge their personal lives withthe “general stream of life” of the Soviet collective.
57A private existence
in distinction or even opposition to the life of the collective, however, wasconsidered inferior and unfulﬁlled. 
Iuliia Piatnitskaia described in her diary a sense of personal regres-
sion arising from her inability to participate in the forward-thrusting lifeof the Soviet people. An engineer by background, she had lost her jobfollowing her husband’s arrest in 1937, and now spent much time at apublic library , leaﬁng through technical journals:
I looked through Mechanical Engineering . Every day that I live through
pushes me further back. New machines are being built: lathes, agricul-tural tools, machines for the Metro, for bridges, etc. Work has been orga-nized in new ways. . . . Engineers are raising in new ways questions of206 JOCHEN HELLBECK
57See, for example, the diary of A. Aﬁnogenov , entry of 29 July 1937 (RGALI, f. 2172,
op. 3, ed. 5).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
organization and or the technology of tool production. All in all, there is
no doubt that life is moving forward, regardless of any “sticks in thewheel.” The wonderful Palace of Culture for the Zisovets plant. I’m gettingreally jealous: why am I not in their collective?
58
One of the strategies employed by Piatnitskaia to deal with the
calamity of her husband’s arrest, a strategy also suggested by the stateprocurator to whom she turned for help, was to “stand above [her] per-sonal life” (9 April 1938). Piatnitskaia was “tortured” that she could notbring herself to hate her husband, an enemy of the people. She urgedherself to “prove, not for others, but for myself,” that she could over-come her personal doubts and distance herself from him: “You willprove with this that you stand higher than a wife, and higher than amother. You will prove with this that you are a citizen of the Great SovietUnion. And if you don’t have the strength to do this, then to the devilwith you.”
59
This article has sought to introduce a historically contextualized notionof subjectivity for the early Soviet period (1917–41). Contrary to a wide-spread popular habit to cast the Soviet regime solely as an oppressivepower that strove to subjugate Soviet citizens’ sense of their selves, theessay has pointed to the Revolution as a tremendous subjectivizing force.This was on account not only of the language of individual and socialemancipation which burst on the scene in 1917 and provided peoplewith entirely new registers of self-expression. More important was thefact that subjectivity became an intensely political and, indeed, redeem-ing category practically from the outset of the Revolution. The questionsof who one was, for or against the Revolution, whether one couldchange, and how one could demonstrably transform oneself into a revolutionary subject, were central, arguably the most pressing, ques-tions of the period of early Soviet rule – questions that the Soviet regime pursued in the name of the Revolution, but of course also for the purpose of molding a loyal popular following. As a consequence,Soviet citizens had no choice but to be aware of their “selves” as a dis-tinct political category , as a personal identity subject to public scrutiny ,and as an entity to be molded and perfected through work on oneself.The Revolution thus underscored – or in many cases actually created –the sense that one possessed, and had to be able to present, a distinctpersonal biography . Without any doubt the uninterrupted chain ofSTALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 207
58Iuliia Piatnitskaia, Dnevnik zheny bol’shevika (Benson, VT, 1987), 149 (entry of 26
March 1938).
59Ibid., entry of 27 May 1938.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
social and personal ruptures caused by war, revolution, and intense
Soviet social engineering had a shattering effect on individuals’ preex-isting sense of selves, but it would be wrong to infer from this a sociallandscape of fractured, atomized individuals, as has been suggested,
60
because at the same time (and as never before) Soviet citizens were urgedto comprehend themselves in terms of coherent self-narratives and thusto sculpt themselves as autobiographical subjects. From the outset,Soviet revolutionary policies had a strong subjective corollary , wherebyindividuals were to weave their subjective voices into the collectiveproject of building a socialist society . This subjective stance, whichgained even more political weight in the 1930s as compared to the pre-ceding decade, has to be taken into account when studying autobio-graphical statements of the age.
61
Conceivably one of the most lasting effects of the prewar Soviet
regime was the creation of coherent and purposeful individual bio-graphies on a mass scale. In any event one can observe a recurrentdesire on the part of surviving Soviet citizens to emphasize a sense of historic purpose and personal fulﬁllment when recounting their experience of the prewar Stalin period. Antonina Berezhnaia, formerlyan engineer from Sverdlovsk, surprised her Western interviewers whokept asking her about the shortages and difﬁculties of her youth.Instead, all she wanted to do was talk about “production and work forthe public good over personal life and private satisfaction.”
62And Leonid
Potemkin, author of a remarkable self-expressivist Stalin era diary , wasadamant in his old age to combat the notion that Stalinism meant justsacriﬁce, just evil, and just repression. In his own words: “I categoricallyreject the slanderous claim that our generation allegedly lived its life invain.”
63208 JOCHEN HELLBECK
60See especially Plaggenborg, “Grundprobleme der Kulturgeschichte.”
61On the turn toward individuating practices in the 1930s see Vadim Volkov , “The
Concept of Kul’tumost’ : Notes on the Stalinist Civilizing Process,” in Everyday Revolution:
Subjects in Formation in Early Soviet Culture , ed. C. Kiaer and E. Naiman (forthcoming);
Oleg Kharkhordin, The Collective and the Individual in Russia (Berkeley , 1999); Vladimir
Papernyi, Kul’tura “Dva” (Ann Arbor, 1985); and Raymond A. Bauer, The New Man in
Soviet Psychology (1952; reprint ed. Cambridge, MA, 1968).
62Barbara Engel and A. Posadskaya-Vanderbeck, eds., A Revolution of Their Own: V oices
of W omen in Soviet History (Boulder, 1998), 101–16, esp. 102–3. Berezhnaia also remem-
bered how as a worker forewoman she tried to raise the morale of her fellow workers bygoing through the shop and singing them the song, “ All Our Life Is a Struggle.” A por-trait photograph of hers from 1932, which she showed to her Western interlocutors, borethe dedication on the back: “ A few words to my friend: Only by means of persistent strug-gle and lengthy work on the self can a person reach the heights of science. It is essentialto value life and to know how to extract from it only what is good, uniting that with one’sideals. Then life will be interesting and full of happiness” (ibid., 107–8). 
63Author’s interview with L. A. Potemkin, 29 March 1995.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Further Reading: Stalinist Subjectivity
Veronique Garros et al., eds., Intimacy and Terror: Soviet Diaries of the 1930s
(New York, 1995).
Igal Halﬁn, From Darkness to Light: Class, Consciousness, and Salvation in Revolu-
tionary Russia (Pittsburgh, 2000).
Igal Halﬁn, ed., Language ,Revolution ,and the Poetics of Revolutionary Identity
(London, 2002).
Jochen Hellbeck, “Fashioning the Stalinist Soul: The Diary of Stepan Podlubnyi,
1931–1939,” Jahrbucher fur Geschichte Osteuropas , vol. 44, no. 3 (1996).
Oleg Kharkhordin, The Collective and the Individual in Russia: A Study of Practices
(Berkeley , 1999).
Anna Krylova, “The Tenacious Liberal Subject in Soviet Studies,” Kritika , vol.
1, no. 1 (2000).
Eric Naiman, Sex in Public: The Incarnation of Early Soviet Ideology (Princeton,
1997).STALIN -ERA AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL TEXTS 209
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Women and Gender
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
9
Women in Soviet Society: Equality,
Development, and Social Change
Gail Warshofsky Lapidus
Excerpted from Gail Warshofsky Lapidus, Women in Soviet Society:
Equality, Development, and Social Change (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1978).
Editor’s Introduction
Stalinism had a particularly strong impact on women’s lives and gender
roles in Soviet society. In addition to the repression and hardship sufferedby the entire population, women experienced both new opportunities andnew burdens under Stalin. Stalinist industrialization required the recruit-ment of large numbers of women into the industrial workforce, therebygranting them new employment opportunities and restructuring the gen-dered division of labor. At the same time, the Soviet government soughtto increase the birthrate by emphasizing women’s reproductive obliga-tions and their “natural roles” as mothers. Women under Stalinism endedup with the double burden of work outside the home combined withuncompensated domestic labor and responsibility for childraising.
T o explain how Stalinism restructured the gender order and yet
nonetheless perpetuated women’s inequality is an important historicalproblem. There were members of the Bolshevik Party who already beforethe Revolution called for women’s liberation and equality.
1Bolshevik fem-
inists, such as Aleksandra Kollontai, sought to abolish the family and estab-lish collective responsibility for childraising, so as to free women for equalparticipation in public life.
2Early Soviet legislation weakened the family
and ofﬁcial propaganda heralded equal opportunities for women under
1Richard Stites, The Women’s Liberation Movement in Russia: Feminism, Nihilism, and 
Bolshevism, 1860–1930 (Princeton, 1977).
2Barbara Evans Clements, Bolshevik Feminist:The Life of Aleksandra Kollontai (Bloomington,
1979).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
socialism. But women’s equality was not a priority for most Party leaders,
and many, including Lenin and Stalin, were not prepared to abolish thefamily. Moreover, a myriad of social problems, from prostitution to home-less children, prompted calls to reinforce traditional family and genderroles.
3
In the selection below, Gail Lapidus explains that when the Stalinist
leadership did recruit women into the industrial labor force, it was notto provide them with equal opportunity but rather to ﬁll a desperate needfor labor during the industrialization drive.
4Literally millions of women
were recruited into Soviet industry in the 1930s, and during the SecondWorld War this recruitment intensiﬁed, so that women constituted amajority of all workers by 1945. Industrial employment offered womennew wage-earning possibilities, but it did not lead to equality. Womenfaced substantial hostility and discrimination from male managers andworkers, and often they received the low-status, low-paying jobs in fac-tories. Simultaneously women continued to bear the brunt of childcareand domestic chores. Despite ofﬁcial promises to provide childcare andcommunal dining facilities, these services remained badly underfundedthroughout the Stalin era, so women had to fulﬁll their traditional house-hold functions in addition to working outside the home.
Lapidus also discusses the Stalinist regime’s family policy and its impact
on women. In the mid-1930s, the Soviet government reversed its legisla-tion weakening the family and began to promote the importance of mar-riage and family. In addition to reﬂecting a more general move towardsocial stabilization, this policy was enacted by Stalin and his fellow leadersin order to raise the country’s birthrate. Soviet legislation in 1936 bannedabortion, and a concurrent propaganda campaign stressed women’s oblig-ation to have children. This campaign deﬁned women’s identities less asindependent wage earners and more as wives and mothers.Whereas fem-inist ideas of the early Soviet period had stressed similar and equal rolesfor men and women in public life, Stalinist policy tended to promote dif-ferentiation in gender roles.
Legislation and propaganda during the Second World War and postwar
period further differentiated women from men. The mobilization of menfor military service, while it created even greater employment opportu-nities for women on the homefront, reinforced the difference in genderroles. Family legislation in 1944 further strengthened the family andoffered increased material rewards to women who had many children,thereby tying women’s identity even more closely to motherhood. Pro-214 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
3Wendy Goldman, Women, the State and Revolution: Soviet Family Policy and Social Life,
1917–1936 (New Y ork, 1993).
4See also Melanie Ilic, Women Workers in the Soviet lnterwar Economy: From ‘Protection’ to
‘Equality’ (New Y ork, 1999).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
paganda and ﬁction of the postwar period reinforced traditional gender
roles by portraying women in a subordinate position to their husbandswithin the family. Thus, as Lapidus shows, Stalinism provided women withnew opportunities, but it did not grant them equality. The Stalinist lead-ership was guided not by feminist principles but rather by an instrumen-tal desire to mobilize women’s manual and reproductive labor. For womenthe result was a dual role as both workers and mothers, and the doubleburden of uncompensated domestic labor and full-time work outside thehome.WOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 215
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Women in Soviet Society: Equality,
Development, and Social Change
Gail Warshofsky Lapidus
By the end of the ﬁrst decade of Soviet rule, a gradual shift had occurred
in the assumptions and orientations that guided Soviet policy . The egal-itarian and libertarian strains of Bolshevism, limited and contradictoryfrom the start, had been temporarily reinforced by the imperatives ofinsurgency . With the consolidation of the new regime, they were over-whelmed by new economic and political priorities.
1Acute tensions
arising from the rule of a modernizing, authoritarian elite over a largelypeasant society compelled further adaptations of revolutionary aspira-tions to the realities of Russian life. Moreover, while the revolutionarygeneration of Old Bolsheviks steeped in the cosmopolitan intellectualtraditions of European social democracy still dominated the Party’scentral organs, the vast expansion of the Party’s membership in the1920s altered its composition, center of gravity , and outlook. Lowerlevels of the Party apparatus were increasingly staffed by a new gener-ation of Party recruits, who were of very different social origins andpolitical orientations and who brought more traditional attitudes andpatterns of behavior to political life.
2Under these circumstances, a lib-
ertarian concern with the requisites of female emancipation recededstill further into the background, and more instrumental preoccupa-tions came increasingly to the forefront of political life.
It was not, then, a revolutionary program of emancipation that
brought about the profound changes in women’s roles of subsequentdecades. Nor was it the slow but cumulative effect of broader eco-nomic and social changes. The transformation of women’s roles was, to a considerable degree, the indirect result of the inauguration of the
1For a suggestive treatment of the broader transformation of Soviet ideology see 
Barrington Moore, Soviet Politics: The Dilemma of Power (Cambridge, Mass., 1959).
2The rapid growth of the Party from a prerevolutionary membership of 8,500 in 1905
to 24,000 in early 1917 and to over 1,000,000 by 1925 offers some indication of theshrinking weight of the Old Bolshevik contingent. By the end of 1927 more than 60percent of the secretaries of Party cells were persons who had joined the Party after 1921(Leonard Schapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union [New York, 1959], p. 311).
See also Merle Fainsod, How Russia is Ruled , 2nd ed. (Cambridge, Mass., 1963), pp.
248–59. and T . H. Rigby , The Communist Party Membership in the USSR (Princeton, 1968),
p. 52. Roger Pethybridge examines the political consequences of backwardness in The
Social Prelude to Stalinism (London, 1974).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
First Five Year Plan in 1928, the collectivization of agriculture that
accompanied it, and the emergence of new patterns of authority underStalin.
The forced collectivization of agriculture, with its stunning impact 
on authority structures and social relationships in the rural milieu, andthe massive entry of women into the industrial labor force during the1930s, a process given still further impetus by the outbreak of WorldWar II, were the central features of this social transformation. Withthem came a vast expansion of educational opportunities for women,the spread of a network of institutions for the education and care of chil-dren, and the enactment of protective labor legislation and social programs designed to ensure the compatibility of women’s domesticresponsibilities with industrial employment. These changes reverber-ated across the whole range of social institutions including, most impor-tantly , the family itself.
Yet the context in which these changes occurred bore little resem-
blance to the visions surrounding initial discussions of the woman ques-tion. Where earlier advocates of drawing women into paid employmenthad seen it as a way of enhancing female status and independence,rising rates of female employment during the 1930s were a largelyunplanned expression of a sustained economic and social crisis. Theemergence of new institutional arrangements to support these new economic roles – communal child care facilities, communal dining,communal housing – occurred in a chaotic atmosphere, as a hastilyimprovised response to the pressures of rapid urbanization and risingfemale employment.
Nevertheless, the new roles assumed by women were neither acci-
dental nor random. They were intimately linked to a strategy of indus-trial development in which women were not merely the beneﬁciaries but also the instruments and shock absorbers of a particular pattern of political, economic, and social modernization. Broadly speaking, the Stalinist strategy of industrialization – with its consequences foremployment, urbanization, stratiﬁcation, consumption, the supply ofservices, and the reproduction and socialization of children – necessar-ily entailed the performance of particular economic and social roles by women. Some aspects of these roles were dramatically new, and all involved an intensiﬁcation of societal demands. In other respects,however, Stalinism perpetuated or even strengthened traditional normsand patterns of behavior and extended them to new contexts.
Indeed, it was the extraordinary scope and pace of social transfor-
mation and the unexpected emergence of what Moshe Lewin has aptlylabeled a “quicksand society” that called forth Draconian measures tolimit the scope of social dislocation and to create islands of stability inWOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 217
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
a sea of social chaos.3The family policies of the revolutionary era fell
victim to new needs. Efforts to halt the further fragmentation of familylife and to stem the alarming decline of birth rates occasioned by mate-rial hardship and social instability resulted in a partial reversal of earlierlegislation. Measures originally designed to enhance the freedom andautonomy of women and to complement potential new economic roleswere whittled away or abandoned in a desperate attempt to enhance thestability of the family and give greater ofﬁcial recogniton to its procre-ative and socializing functions.
A distinctive new social order gradually took shape under the force
of these often contradictory pressures. New obligations, roles, andopportunities for women were assimilated into older values and patternsof behavior to create an amalgam of tradition and transformation thatwas the essence of the Stalin era.
Social Production: Female Employment and Industrialization
The inauguration of the First Five Year Plan in 1928 and the forcible
collectivization of agriculture that accompanied it brought profoundchanges in the economic and social roles of Soviet women. For ruralRussia, Stalinism brought intense economic pressures and a new locusof authority while leaving intact many basic features of economic andsocial life. The extensive involvement of women in agricultural laborcontinued under collectivization; the intimate connection betweenhousehold and productive activity in the rural milieu limited the directimpact of new economic and political conditions on patterns of femaleemployment. The migration of large numbers of women to urban andindustrial regions, where the separation of household from employmentwas sharp, had, by contrast, profound structural consequences.
Throughout the 1920s the conviction that women should be drawn
into social production on a vast scale had remained a largely theoreti-cal concern. The general contraction of the economy and the inﬂux ofrural migrants resulted in high rates of urban unemployment, whichaffected women with particular severity .
4Similarly , the commitment to218 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
3Moshe Lewin, “Class, State and Ideology in the Piatiletka,” in Cultural Revolution in
Russia, 1928–1933 , ed. Sheila Fitzpatrick (Bloomington, 1978).
4The rise in unemployment between 1922 and 1929 and the particularly high inci-
dence of female unemployment are documented in Solomon Schwarz, Labor in the Soviet
Union (New York, 1931), pp. 38–9. The First Five Year Plan anticipated a gradual decline
in unemployment between 1929 and 1933, not yet understanding the transformationof the entire labor market that was already under way and that would shortly result inacute labor shortages.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the creation of a network of public child-care institutions and commu-
nal services and to an expansion of educational opportunities forwomen was not translated into reality on any substantial scale duringthis ﬁrst decade.
The rapid expansion of the economy after 1928 transformed a 
politically desirable objective into a pressing economic need. As late as 1929 the authors of the First Five Year Plan still looked at femalelabor primarily as it affected women’s economic and political status.They recommended an intensiﬁed enrollment of women in new indus-trial areas, fearing that the planned expansion of basic industries, inwhich few women were employed, would lead to a decline in the overallratio of women workers.
5The Plan envisioned only a modest increase
in the proportion of women employed in the public sector, from 27percent of the socialized labor force in 1927–8 to 32.5 percent in1932–3.
6
These expectations were rapidly overtaken by the momentum of eco-
nomic changes. In the winter of 1929–30 unemployment began todecline, and by 1930 a combination of demographic and economicfactors had created an acute manpower shortage. Party and govern-mental efforts to regulate the labor force were supplanted by measuresto assure its supply and to allocate manpower to individual industriesand plants. Growing concern with the fuller utilization of urban man-power resources focused increasingly on the need to draw women intoindustrial employment. A new perspective emerged in ofﬁcial docu-ments, one that viewed the increased employment of women not interms of its effects on women but as essential to the fulﬁllment of theeconomic plans.
A resolution of the Party Central Committee in September 1930
stated that, “to insure the fulﬁllment of the production program for thethird year of the ﬁve-year period,” it was necessary to “draw more juve-nile workers as well as wives of workers and other toilers into produc-tion.”
7This Party directive was followed shortly by a government decree
spelling out concrete measures to increase the employment of women.Quotas were established for the various industries, and educationalinstitutions were required to admit ﬁxed proportions of women for WOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 219
5“If the proportion of women employed in various occupational divisions remained
unchanged, the different pace of developing the several sections of the national economywould result in a decline of the percentage of women among the total of wage earners.. . . This would be quite unsound; we must make it our task to widen the scope ofwomen’s work everywhere.” Five Y ear Plan of Economic Construction of the USSR (Moscow,
1929), Vol. 2, p. 180.
6Ibid. In the spring of 1930 the target was raised to 34 or 35 percent.
7Pravda , September 3, 1930.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
training in different ﬁelds.8In January of 1931 the People’s Commis-
sariat of Labor issued two listings of occupations, one enumeratingthose to be reserved exclusively for women and one listing those to bereserved predominantly for women, a striking example of the tendencyfor traditional conceptions of “women’s work” to be extended to a newcontext. While this particular measure was later superseded, the notionthat certain occupations were particularly suitable for an expansion offemale labor persisted and served both to enhance and to channel theentry of women into the modern sector of the labor force.
The years between 1930 and 1937 saw a massive inﬂux of women
into industry . By 1932 the number of women employed had risen fromthree million to six million, far exceeding all estimates, yet so dramaticwas the increase in total employment during these years that the pro-portion of women remained at 27.4 percent, virtually unchanged from1927–1928. The greatest gains were made in industry , and particularlyin industries such as construction, where women had previously playeda negligible role.
The reception of women workers in traditionally male ﬁelds was fre-
quently hostile, according to many accounts, although this was lessoften the case in the eastern regions of the USSR, where the demand fornew labor was particularly great and where the absence of entrenchedmale traditions permitted more ﬂexible hiring practices. Most of thesenew women workers were young and unskilled, and lower levels of qual-iﬁcations and experience combined with employers’ discrimination tochannel them into lower levels of the occupational hierarchy .
During the Second Five Year Plan period, between 1933 and 1937,
an even more substantial rise took place in female industrial employ-ment. A total of 3,350,000 women entered the labor force during theseyears, constituting some 82 percent of all newly employed workers. In1937 almost 9.4 million women were employed, raising their propor-tion of the labor force to 34 percent.
9By November 1939 the propor-
tion of women in industry in general had reached 41.6 percent, andwomen constituted an even higher proportion of manual workers.Whole industries were now utilizing women on an unprecedented scale;women formed one-fourth of the manual workers in iron ore mining,coal mining, and the iron and steel industry . The First and Second FiveYear Plans paved the way for the even greater reliance on womenworkers during World War II, when the massive mobilization of malesfor military service would otherwise have had adverse effects on pro-ductive capacity . As the war ﬁnally drew to a close in 1945, the pro-220 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
8V . N. Tolkunova, Pravo zhenshchin na trud i ego garantii (Moscow, 1967), pp. 87–97.
9Schwarz, Labor in the Soviet Union , pp. 71–2.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
portion of women in the modern sector had reached an all-time high of
56 percent.
The massive entry of women into industrial production was inter-
preted by many in the language of an earlier epoch. The First Five YearPlan period had evoked a revival of civil war militance and utopianism.In the enthusiasm of cultural revolution, the new role of women in eco-nomic life was seized on as additional evidence of the imminence of fullsocialism. A vast and vivid literature extolled the industrial millenniumand linked the new economic role of women to sweeping plans for thecommunal reorganization of life. Elaborate economic calculations rationalized and buttressed visionary schemes.
10
In the face of a growing labor shortage, the social costs of private
household production appeared particularly wasteful. S. G. Strumilin, aproliﬁc theorist of the future socialist society , and a key ﬁgure in the formulation of the First Five Year Plan, had computed that for every unit of population some seven hundred hours of precious time were lost in cooking, laundry , and the care of children. As a consequence, he estimated, some thirty million potential workers were required todevote full time to unproductive household labor.
11Strumilin’s concern
was echoed in a study by the Workers and Peasants Inspection of theRSFSR:
Every day 36 million hours are expended in the RSFSR for cooking alone.
This means that on the basis of the eight-hour working day , four and one-half million workers or double the number that are employed in heavyindustry are occupied in cooking. At the same time, collective cooking ofthe same amount of food would require one-sixth of this time, and wouldrelease over four million housewives for productive labor.
12
The development of a wide network of communal institutions for child
care, laundry , and cooking was now urged not merely to free womenWOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 221
10For a fascinating discussion of these utopian visions, see S. Frederick Starr, “The Anti-
Urban utopias of Early Stalinist Russia,” in Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution . A collection
of proposals is included in B. Lunin, ed., Goroda sotsializma i sotsialisticheskaia rekon-
struktsiia byta (Moscow, 1930). One approach called for the manufacture of portable
dwellings in modular units to house one person each, encouraging geographical andsocial mobility for the “liberated” members of former households. Proposals for commu-nal housing and services, utopian in appearance, were plausible in the context of theFirst Five Year Plan. As Starr points out, “collectivization was a fact wherever factorieswere built without ﬁrst constructing adequate housing,” while the shrinking allotmentof space in both Moscow and in the newer cities meant that “communalization by neces-sity was already in practice.”
11S. G. Strumilin, Rabochii byt v tsifrakh (Moscow, 1926).
12Susan Kingsbury and Mildred Fairchild, Factory, Family, and W omen in the Soviet Union
(New York, 1935), p. 202.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
from the drudgery of household work but to release a vast pool of labor
for the expanding Soviet economy .
The wider utilization of female labor offered still further advantages.
The increased employment of urban women could substitute for anadditional inﬂux of labor from rural areas, thus substantially reducingthe cost of the urban infrastructure needed to support a larger laborforce. As another economist calculated:
During the third and fourth year of the Five Year Plan we shall need at
least one and a half million new employees in industry alone, and aboutfour million for the economic system as a whole. If we count even twomembers to a family , and if each family must have its own housewifeengaged exclusively in unproductive labor, it would mean that we shouldhave to bring in eight million people from the villages, in order to get fourmillion workers – and this in turn would mean a building program quitebeyond our means.
13
Other Soviet writers were quick to point out that female employment
would also facilitate a more efﬁcient organization of urban life. Thesavings resulting from the reduction of the number of dependents perwage earner would become available for investment in communal facil-ities. This argument recurred frequently in the wave of pamphlets andbooks decribing the future socialist city that was inspired by the revivalof utopian leftism between 1928 and 1932. As one prominent theoristsuggested:
In individual households from 10 to 15 percent of the general cost of the
establishment is spent on separate kitchens, laundries, and storerooms.When building centralized houses, all these auxiliary rooms will beunnecessary and our communal kitchens, dining-rooms, and laundrieswill not require so much expenditure. Construction of special buildingsfor the education and boarding of children may not be considered as anextra expense for this eliminates the need for living quarters for childrenin the adults’ houses. We should also remember that the communal houseemancipates women and thus decreases the number of dependents in thefamily . If, for instance, we need 10,000 workers for a new factory , we haveto build a town for at least 40,000 people if we are going to have houseswith individual apartments; but if we build a socialist city, we shall need to
accommodate only from 20,000 to 24,000 people, since the women will havefree time for the factory and the only dependents will be children . (Italics
added.)
14222 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
13Ibid.
14Ibid., p. 203.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Economic rationality appeared to buttress utopian fervor in the view
that the employment of women would not only ﬁnance the developmentof new services but would result in higher levels of family income andtherefore a real improvement in welfare: “It has already been plannedto raise the workers’ budget about 100 percent by the end of the ﬁve-year period, and the productive labor of the adult women members ofthe family will raise the income to a ﬁgure at least two and a half timesgreater than it is at present.”
15
To what extent these were conscious and explicit objectives directly
affecting the planning process itself is difﬁcult to answer on the basis ofthe available evidence. Inﬂuential economists and political ﬁgures wereprominent among the authors of these proposals, and supported themwith elaborate economic calculations. Yet the political conﬂicts sur-rounding the planning process, the atmosphere in which the First FiveYear Plan was launched, and the chaotic conditions that followedsuggest that events far outran the capacity of the leadership to directand control them. It is, therefore, more likely that the rising participa-tion of women in the labor force was a secondary consequence of laborshortages and falling real wages, retrospectively rationalized as a steptoward liberaton.
Soviet planners clearly sought to limit the furious pace of urbaniza-
tion.
16Severe restrictions were placed on migration, internal passports
were reintroduced in 1932, and kolkhoz (collective farm) members were
required to obtain formal permission to leave the countryside. Still, the actual rate of migration vastly exceeded the planned rate. Alsounplanned, but the inevitable outcome of economic decisions, was asharp decline in real wages. An acute inﬂation was responsible for a dra-matic increase in nominal wage levels, but this rise concealed a seriousdecline in purchasing power and living standards.
The decline in real wages made it virtually impossible to support an
urban family with several dependents on the income of a single bread-winner. Large numbers of women were therefore obliged to seekemployment to supplement family income. Indeed, the very fact that the decline in real wages did not preclude a rise in per capita urban consumption during these years was largely due to the entry of urbanwomen into the labor force in large numbers.
17As ofﬁcial statisticsWOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 223
15Ibid., p. 204.
16The argument that socialist industrialization strategy involves an effort to economize
on urbanization costs is developed in more general terms in Gur Ofer, “Industrial Struc-ture, Urbanization, and Growth Strategy of Socialist Countries,” Hebrew University ofJerusalem Research Report No. 53 (Jerusalem, 1974).
17Janet Chapman, Real Wages in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Mass., 1963), p. 137.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
reveal, a steady decline occurred in the number of dependents per wage
earner, from 2.46 in 1928 to 2.05 in 1930, 1.59 in 1935, and 1.28 in1940.
18While part of this decline was a consequence of falling urban
birthrates, the ﬁgures also reﬂect the fact that rising female employmentreduced the number of dependents supported by the income of thehousehold head.
The massive entry of women into the labor force was given additional
impetus by other features of Stalinist policy . The devastating impact ofcollectivization on rural economic and social life brought large numbersof women to cities in search of employment. The purges brought with them not merely political insecurity but deportations and deaths,which in turn obliged additional numbers of women to become self-supporting. Finally , the massive mobilization of men for military serviceduring World War II required a vast inﬂux of female replacements. Theenormous loss of males transformed millions of widows into heads ofhouseholds, and deprived a whole generation of women of the oppor-tunity to marry at all. Throughout the Stalin era, then, an expandingdemand for labor in the modern sector interacted with demographic im-balances and economic insecurity to increase the availability of womenfor such employment.
Whether the rise in female employment was anticipated or intended
at the start of the First Five Year Plan or was initially an explicit featureof a larger strategy of industrial development, it was a consequence ofboth speciﬁc economic policies and of larger social changes associatedwith Stalinism. Moreover, the terms on which it occurred profoundlyaltered the deﬁnition of women’s liberation. In earlier discussions, theentry of women into the labor force was viewed in political terms, as adimension of emancipation. Economic independence was viewed as aprerequisite of genuine equality . Now, the employment of women in theindustrial labor force was integral to a strategy of development that uti-lized female labor as a major economic resource, facilitating a rapidexpansion of the labor force at relatively low cost.
Whether the massive entry of women into social production would
in fact prove liberating depended on the wider social context in which it occurred. Educational opportunities and vocational training wereessential if women were to occupy anything but the least skilled posi-tions. Moreover, if the new economic roles of women were to place themon an equal footing with men, massive investments in public serviceswere essential. An extensive network of preschool institutions and after-school programs was needed for the care of children of workingmothers, while the development of communal laundries, dining rooms,224 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
18Ibid., p. 167.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and other social services to free women from household chores was vital
if their employment was to constitute a form of liberation rather thanan additional burden.
The development of these services, however, failed to keep pace with
the entry of women into industry . Indeed, the whole pattern of Sovietindustrialization explicitly depended on the low priority assigned to pre-cisely those economic sectors that might have lightened the burdens ofworking women. Soviet development priorities not only failed to relievethe pressures on the individual household to any substantial degree; itactually increased them in ways that prevented women from proﬁt-ing fully from new opportunities. Economic policies resting on theunderdevelopment of the service sector and social policies designed to strengthen the family as a reproductive and socializing institutionassigned a set of functions and roles to women that in some respectsintensiﬁed the sexual division of labor both in public arenas and withinthe family itself.
Family Policy and the Redeﬁnition of Female Roles
The economic pressures on the household associated with Stalinist
industrialization were accompanied by new political demands as well.Since they contradicted the central assumptions on which early Sovietorientations toward the family rested, it is not surprising that a reassess-ment of family policy followed.
The new family legislation of the Stalin era was marked by certain
conservative, even authoritarian, features that constituted a signiﬁcantdeparture from earlier precedents. In the face of such massive socialtransformations as those brought about by industrialization and collec-tivization, and the new opportunities for social mobility these changescreated for women, a focus on the conservative features of Stalinismmay appear puzzling. Yet the central feature of Stalinism – the featurethat distinguished it most sharply from the preceding regime – was pre-cisely its amalgam of radical transformation and social conservatism.Massive social dislocation called forth efforts at stabilization and inte-gration that drew heavily on the values, behavioral patterns, and orga-nizational mechanisms of traditional Russian society while adaptingthem to new purposes.
The “revolution from above” of 1928–32, which marked the ﬁrst
phase of Stalinism, was characterized by a militance and radicalismevocative of the civil war period.
19Rapid industrialization and agricul-WOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 225
19For a collection of studies dealing with the effects of these events in different areas of
Soviet politics and society , see Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution in Russia .
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
tural collectivization were its central features, but these were also years
that saw a dramatic increase in the availability of institutional child careand in the scope of women’s industrial employment, educational oppor-tunities, and political participation. The ﬁrst stage of Stalinism was, inshort, a period of rapid social change that left its imprint on a very widerange of social indicators.
The campaign for industrialization and collectivization absorbed the
energies and enthusiasm of Party militants, temporarily eclipsing theburning social and sexual controversies of the 1920s. It simultaneouslyundermined the institutional and political bases of support of an oldergeneration of revolutionary leaders and cultural authorities. By late1931, in reaction to the social disorganization and breakdown thatthese radical changes had precipitated, a process of retrenchment wasvisible, and the contours of a new stage of development with new pri-orities began to emerge. By the mid-1930s – in education, law, andculture, as well as in family policy – a new orientation had taken shape.
20
Interpretations of Stalinism that see only its archaic and Thermi-
dorean features, on the one hand, or those that stress its functionalnecessity to the creation of a modern industrial society , on the other,overlook its adaptive and integrative aspects. A complex interplay of his-torical and cultural traditions, the socioeconomic environment, theemerging political system, and the personality and attitudes of Stalinhimself shaped the transformation of Soviet political culture in the1930s.
This transformation involved the ﬁnal repudiation of the libertarian
and egalitarian strains that had stamped the economic and social legis-lation as well as the political values of the 1920s. Stalin’s attack on“petty-bourgeois egalitarianism” in 1931 signaled the reintroduction ofsubstantial wage differentials as an incentive to economic productivityand an increasing differentiation of status and prestige to reinforce newauthority relations. These broader changes in social and political values,which were themselves signiﬁcant for the deﬁnition of women’s roles,had particular ramiﬁcations for the role of the family .
The shift in Soviet policy toward the family in the mid-1930s was
neither a conclusive demonstration of the family’s functional necessitynor a complete reversion to the status quo ante. It occurred in thecontext of political and economic changes that transformed the environment in which the family was embedded. The nationalization of industry and the collectivization of agriculture had shattered the226 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
20These shifts are reviewed in N. Timasheff, The Great Retreat (New York, 1946); Leon
Trotskii, The Revolution Betrayed , trans. Max Eastman (New York, 1937); and Fainsod,
How Russia is Ruled , pp. 104–16.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
family’s control over productive resources, while the expansion of public
education reduced its inﬂuence over the socialization and placement ofchildren. Moreover, as refugee interviews made clear, the convictionthat the Soviet state controlled the future made the majority of familiesunwilling to jeopardize the future access of their children to educationand employment by communicating their own hostility to the youngergeneration. In the light of these circumstances, a change in ofﬁcialpolicy could be based on the reasonable assurance that the new recog-nition now granted the family would not seriously compromise the newsocial order.
The actual substance of the family legislation enacted in the mid-
1930s was relatively moderate in its provisions.
21In a broader sense,
however, such legislation expressed a new orientation toward the familythat constituted a dramatic departure from the values and expectationsof elite culture in the earlier decade. No longer was the “witheringaway” of the family or, for that matter, of the state itself viewed as theinevitable and desirable consequence of economic and political change;like the state, it was argued, the family grows stronger as full socialismapproaches. The family was now said to be the bulwark of the socialsystem, a microcosm of the new socialist society . It was required toreproduce in miniature the authoritarian and hierarchical features ofthe emerging political Leviathan. In The Revolution Betrayed (1936),
Trotskii pointed to the shift in family policy as an especially tellingexpression of a Thermidorean reaction, explaining that “the most com-pelling motive of the present cult of the family is undoubtedly the needof the bureaucracy for a stable hierarchy of relations and for the disci-plining of youth by means of 40 million points of support for authorityand power.”
22
The new orientation, far from devaluing the role of the family , now
treated it as a pivotal social institution performing vital functions. It wasto serve above all as a model of social order, and for this purpose maritalstability was essential. The independence, autonomy , and mobilityencouraged by earlier legislation were henceforth to be restricted in theinterests of preserving a stable and monogamous partnership. As Pravda
proclaimed, “so-called ‘free love’ and all disorderly sex life are bourgeoisthrough and through, and have nothing to do with either socialist WOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 227
21For a translation of the text of such legislation, as well as some of the accompanying
ofﬁcial explanations of the new family policy , see Rudolf Schlesinger, comp., Changing 
Attitudes in Soviet Russia – The Family in the USSR (London, 1949), pp. 251–347. See also
Alex Inkeles, Social Change in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Mass., 1968), Ch. 11; Kent Geiger,
The Family in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, Mass., 1968), Ch. 4; and Wilhelm Reich, The
Sexual Revolution , trans. Theodore P . Wolfe, 4th ed. rev . (New York, 1969), Pt. II.
22Trotskii, The Revolution Betrayed , p. 153.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
principles or the ethics and standards of conduct of the Soviet citizen.
. . . The elite of our countr y... are as a rule also excellent family men
who dearly love their children. And vice versa: the man who does nottake marriage seriousl y...i s  u s u a l l y  also a bad worker and a poor
member of society .”
23
The effort to promote the stabilization of the family was also linked
to a serious concern with the declining birthrate. A massive press cam-paign linked the joys of motherhood with the beneﬁts of Soviet power.“ A woman without children merits our pity , for she does not know thefull joy of life. Our Soviet women, full-blooded citizens of the freestcountry in the world, have been given the bliss of motherhood.”
24The
idealization of the family and of marital stability and the close associa-tion of femininity with maternity had as a counterpart the repressionof sexual deviance as a social crime. Harsh measures were directed forthe ﬁrst time against both prostitution and homosexuality in the effortto extend order and discipline to personal life.
Yet the attempt to encourage reproduction by portraying mother-
hood as the supreme obligation of Soviet women cast some doubt on thesimultaneous claim that it was the supreme joy . Indeed, the enormoushardships faced by women workers in the forced industrialization of thetimes were reﬂected in the decline of birthrates and in the large numbersof abortions. These conditions motivated the effort to offer enhancedprotection and increased material incentives to potential mothers.
25
Special state allowances were granted to mothers of large families.Single-child families, insisted one distinguished educator, breed egotismand unhappiness, while large families – seven was his favorite number– make it possible to rear children in a proper collective spirit.
26
But the effort to encourage reproduction did not rely on moral
suasion and material incentives alone. The abolition of legal abortionswas the most dramatic feature of the new family legislation of 1936.Abortions could henceforth be performed only when pregnancy endan-gered the life or health of the potential mother; criminal penalties wereattached to violations.
This particular provision of the draft legislation did not go unchal-
lenged. A number of critical letters were published in the press, along228 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
23Schlesinger, Changing Attitudes , p. 252.
24Ibid., p. 254.
25The annual total fertility rate dropped from 4,826.1 in 1930 to 4,255 in 1931 and
3,575 in 1932; a low of 2,904.9 was reached in 1934. See D. Peter Mazur, “Recon-struction of Fertility Trends for the Female Population of the USSR,” Population Studies
21 (July 1967): 38.
26Anton Makarenko, The Collective Family: A Handbook for Russian Parents , trans. Robert
Daglish (New York, 1967), pp. 43–47.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
with elaborate justiﬁcations for the changes. Its objectionable features
were spelled out in a letter from a young engineer, who wrote:
The prohibition of abortion means the compulsory birth of a child to 
a woman who does not want children . . . The birth of a child ties 
married people to each other ....W h ere a child comes into the family
against the will of the parents, a grim personal drama will be enactedwhich will undoubtedly lower the social value of the parents and leave itsmark on the child. A categorical prohibition of abortion will confrontyoung people with a dilemma: either complete sexual abstinence or the risk of jeopardizing their studies and disrupting their life. To my mind any prohibition of abortion is bound to mutilate many a young life. Apart from this, the result of such a prohibition might be an increasein the death rate from abortions because they will then be performed illegally .
27
Her anxieties, in retrospect, appear to have been well-founded. In eval-
uating the effects of Stalin’s legislation, perhaps with an eye to currentcontroversies, the author of a recent study concluded that its impact onbirthrates was short-lived, and its larger consequences harmful: “The1936 resolution forbidding abortion in point of fact did not and couldnot be any serious stimulant to raising the birth rate . . . it merely led
many women having unwanted pregnancies to have illegal abortions,risking their health and sometimes their lives.”
28
If the stabilizing and reproductive functions of the Soviet family were
reinforced by new legislation, the economic role of the household in pro-viding a wide array of services was recognized in new attitudes. Evenhousework, once so harshly stigmatized by Lenin, was now considered“socially useful labor,” while Soviet wives were assured that achieving acomfortable home life was a desirable goal. The ranks of proletarianheroines were now joined by the wives of the new Soviet elite of man-agers and engineers, praised not for heroic feats of production but forintroducing civilization into the lives of their men by planting ﬂowersoutside power stations, sewing linen, and opening fashion studios.
29The
status and identity of a woman were no longer to be derived exclusivelyfrom her independent role in production but at least in part deﬁnedascriptively , as functions of her performance in the roles of wife andmother. The full implications of this redeﬁnition of femininity for thestratiﬁcation system remained to be worked out.WOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 229
27Schlesinger, Changing Attitudes , p. 257.
28E. A. Sadvokasova, Sotsial’no-gigienicheskie aspekty regulirovaniia razmerov sem’i
(Moscow, 1969), p. 210.
29Schlesinger, Changing Attitudes , pp. 235–50.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The socializing functions of the family received particular emphasis
in the new orientation of the Stalin period. Marital stability was itself acondition of the proper upbringing of children. But the view of thefamily as a central socializing agency represented a major shift of per-spective. No longer was upbringing treated as properly a communalresponsibility; the burden was shifted back to the family . But the func-tion itself was redeﬁned in the process, so that upbringing within thehome was not merely a private matter but involved parental responsi-bility to the larger community . In the words of Anton Makarenko, aleading educational authority of the period: “In our country the duty ofa father toward his children is a particular form of his duty towardsociety ....I n  handing over to you a certain measure of social author-
ity , the Soviet state demands from you correct upbringing of future citizens.”
30
Taken together, these aspects of Stalinism represent an effort to 
mobilize women intensively on behalf of a widening array of economic,social, and political objectives. Increasing demands on women were theaccompaniment of expanding opportunities. Pressures toward femaleemployment in industry , the demands on the household, and the treat-ment of marriage, reproduction, and socialization – all effectively broad-ened the deﬁnition of women’s obligations to the larger community . Thenew image of feminine virtue incorporated wifely and maternal dutiesin addition to a contribution to the building of socialism.
The tension of contradictory norms and expectations in the new 
deﬁnition of femininity is splendidly conveyed in the speech of a Sovietﬁctional heroine on a visit to the Kremlin in 1937:
“Our feminine hearts are overﬂowing with emotions,” she said, “and of
these love is paramount. Yet a wife should also be a happy mother andcreate a serene home atmosphere, without, however, abandoning workfor the common welfare. She should know how to combine all thesethings while also matching her husband’s performance on the job.”
“Right!” said Stalin.
31
The new Soviet heroine was to join a highly competitive participation in
the economic arena with nurturing family roles of a rather traditionalkind. This portrait, however, offers striking contrast to the female politi-cal activists of revolutionary literature. In the ﬁrst decade of Sovietdevelopment, the entry of women into public roles was inextricablyassociated with their liberation from family roles, and emancipation was230 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
30Makarenko, Collective Family , p. xii.
31F . Panferov , Bruski , cited in Xenia Gasiorowska, W omen in Soviet Fiction (Madison,
1968), p. 53.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
deﬁned as the opportunity for women to enter as fully into public roles
– political and economic – as men. With the shift in policy toward the family , this unity was ruptured. It was now argued not only thatwomen’s public roles, largely conﬁned to participation in production,were compatible with extensive family roles but also that the two rein-forced each other and were both necessary to real womanhood. Whererevolutionary feminism had anticipated the increasing identity of maleand female roles, the values of the Stalin era stressed differentiation andcomplementarity .
The Stalin era was marked by a sharpening differentiation of male
and female roles in political life as well. The growth of female politicalparticipation did not produce a corresponding increase in the role of women at the apex of the political hierarchy . In the increasingly hierarchical, elitist, authoritarian, and competitive political climate ofStalinism, women were virtually excluded from positions of real impor-tance and were utilized – like Kollontai, Krupskaia, and Stasova – forlargely symbolic purposes.
All these trends were further intensiﬁed by World War II. The 
massive mobilization of men for military service created extraordinaryopportunities for women to rise to positions of real authority in eco-nomic and political life. Communal facilities were rapidly expanded to enable increasing numbers of mothers to join the labor force, whilethe higher educational institutions became almost entirely female. Theheroic performance of Soviet women in wartime – whether on the military front or behind the lines – received elaborate recognition inwartime ﬁction and seemed to promise more genuine equality in thepostwar era.
But the war years brought still further pressures, which sharpened
the normative differentiation of masculinity and femininity , even aswomen took on previously male roles.
32This differentiation extended
even to the labor camps, where the sexual segregation of prisoners wasintroduced in 1944. It received its ultimate expression in the abolitionof coeducation in many Soviet schools in 1943. While the separate edu-cation of boys and girls proved temporary , its justiﬁcation went beyondthe military needs that precipitated it. Underlying the measure was adeﬁnition of masculine and feminine roles of far wider signiﬁcance,which survived the abolition of separate education to persist in moreWOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 231
32Jean Lipman-Blumen’s treatment of role de-differentiation as a system response to
crisis offers a useful perspective for interpreting the patterns of female employment in theUSSR. When the speciﬁc crisis involves a major war, however, the result may be a sharp-ening of normative deﬁnitions of masculinity and femininity , as the Soviet experiencesuggests; “Role de-Differentiation as a System Response to Crisis: Occupational and Political Roles of Women,” Sociological Inquiry 43 (April 1973): 105–30.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
limited form to this day . A leading educational authority explained its
underlying rationale:
It is essential to introduce into girls’ schools such additional subjects as
pedagogics, needlework, courses in domestic science, personal hygieneand the care of children. . . . Those who attend boys’ schools ...m u s t  b e
able to cope with simple repairs to electrical installations and heatingsystems, and with the repair of household objects. . . . It is necessary that
the future warrior and commander should be able to use a map ....I n
boy’s schools the principal should as a rule be a man, and in girls’ schoolsa woman.
33
The trend toward increased differentiation of males and females in both
family law and educational policy thus offers support for the hypothesisof Philip Slater that the sharper the differentiation of conjugal roles ina society , the greater the reliance that will be placed on sex segregationin the training of children for these roles.
34
The Family Edict of July 1944 represented the capstone of this
trend.35It introduced even more severe restrictions on divorce, requir-
ing a two-stage legal proceeding and the payment of high fees. It wentstill further in protecting the sanctity of marriage by ending all recog-nition of unregistered marriages. The new edict thus recreated for theﬁrst time in post-revolutionary Russian history the distinction betweenlegitimate and illegitimate children. Not only would a blank space nowappear on the birth certiﬁcates of all children born outside registeredmarriages, but suits to establish paternity in such cases were alsobanned. At the same time, honorary titles and increased material incen-tives to motherhood, married or unmarried, offered additional protec-tion and security to mothers as compensation for new burdens.
In its effort to encourage the postwar reestablishment of family life
by protecting men from paternity suits, the new legislation obligedwomen to bear alone the consequences of extramarital relationships.But the ofﬁcial encouragement of a double standard of sexual moralityand the sacriﬁce of women’s and children’s rights to the desire for a high birthrate further undermined the commitment to sexual equalityenshrined in early Soviet legislation. In essence, in the words of a recentSoviet critic, it “encouraged a frivolous attitude toward women.”
36232 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
33Schlesinger, Changing Attitudes , pp. 364–5.
34Philip Slater, “Parental Role Differentiation,” in The Family: Its Structure and Functions ,
ed. Rose Laub Coser (New York, 1964), p. 362.
35For its text, see Schlesinger, Changing Attitudes , pp. 367–76.
36E. Z. Danilova, Sotsial’nye problemy truda zhenshchiny-rabotnitsy (Moscow, 1968), p. 64.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In the aftermath of World War II, the high priority assigned to marital
stability and the need to replenish the severe population losses ofwartime further sharpened the tension between the political and eco-nomic priorities of the Stalin period and the commitment to femaleequality and independence. As demobilized veterans returned to reclaimpositions of authority now occupied by women or to rebuild shatteredfamilies with the expectation of female support, comfort, and self-sacriﬁce as reward for wartime hardships, conﬂicting needs and con-tradictory norms emerged acutely . Bare statistics document the fall ofwomen from positions of economic and political authority without con-veying the extent of regret or relief. But the human strains and ambi-guities that accompanied the difﬁcult transition of a war-torn society tothe new priorities of the post-war era and the tensions involved in thereadjustment of male-female relationships to postwar life are best cap-tured in the ﬁction of the postwar period.
In a poignant tale of rural life, a woman widowed by war who drowns
her sorrows in work and rises to the chairmanship of the collective farmis suddenly confronted, after years of separation, by the unexpectedreturn of her husband. The adjustment to new realities proves difﬁcultfor both. The husband, vacillating between pride and humiliation,muses:
He was used to being boss in his house. He used to walk along the village
with an unhurried step, holding his head high and proud. When he wason his way home from the army , he thought he would turn mountainsover. But there are no mountains. ...A n d  M a r y a ,  she moves about, gives
orders. And the more she gives orders, the more she grows even in hiseyes. And the more she grows, the smaller he gets. . . . And it seems she
needs her husband and then again it seems she does not.
37
A struggle over power leads to growing estrangement, ended by the
intervention of the local Party secretary , who, far from encouragingMarya’s aspirations, criticizes her misuse of power.
In countless similar tales, postwar authors chide their too ambitious
heroines for clinging to newly won independence and neglecting thepsychic needs of their men. The dilemmas created for women by the con-ﬂict of public commitments and personal life are a recurrent theme ofpostwar literature, and the sacriﬁce of ambition to family life is the pre-scribed solution. The potential conﬂict over status and mobility thatWOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 233
37Georgii Medynsky , “Marya,” translated in Vera Dunham, In Stalin’s Time (Cambridge,
England, 1976), p. 216. For a suggestive general treatment of this issue, see Chapter 14of Dunham.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
equality might create is conveniently forestalled, and domestic happi-
ness is offered as a surrogate for competitive achievement.
A similar lesson emerges from the story of another marriage in which
the heroine occupied a position of greater authority than her husband.Afﬁrming her determination to compartmentalize roles, she announces:“ ‘ At work, I am your boss. Watch out and don’t resent it. But at home,if you want to, I’ll submit to you.’ Having, however, thought it over, shereﬁned her statement: ‘But at home, we’ll be equals.’ ”
38But even this
solution is insufﬁcient to resolve the tension felt to be inherent in thereversal of traditional statuses. The heroine therefore urges her husbandto continue his studies so that a more ﬁtting balance can be restored,and as if further explanation is necessary , the author ﬁrmly drives thepoint home: “ ‘Come on, do me the favor, catch up ....I  c a n ’ t  b e  t h e  boss
forever. I’ll be having children. . . .’ In her speaks no longer a stubbornagronomist but a woman’s ambition. That ambition consists not of adrive to surpass one’s beloved, but, rather, in being able to consider himsuperior to anybody else, including herself.”
39
The submissive heroines of postwar Soviet ﬁction represent a
response to strains resulting from the structural changes of the Stalinera as well as the social effects of the war years. The increasing edu-cation and employment of women, juxtaposed to pressures for themaintenance of stable family relationships, created disequilibrium andtension in male–female relationships based on relatively traditional cul-tural assumptions. Parsonian sociology has suggested that the precari-ous balance between family and occupational structure in industrialsocieties has generally been maintained by inhibiting dual linkagesbetween the two, which would create tension and competition betweenhusband and wife and which would undermine the complementarity ofroles it assumes to be essential to family stability .
40By excluding married
women from labor-force participation or conﬁning them to secondaryand residual occupational roles and by treating marriage as a mecha-nism for the economic support of women, equilibrium is maintained atthe cost of full equality .
Because it was committed to and dependent on the participation of
women in the labor force, Soviet policy rejected the use of marriage forthe support of women and emphasized measures that would make it234 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
38Yu. Kapusto, “Khleboroby ,” translated in Dunham, In Stalin’s Time , p. 223.
39Ibid.
40Talcott Parsons, “The Social Structure of the Family ,” in The Family: Its Function and
Destiny , ed. Ruth Anshen (New York, 1940), pp. 173–201; see also Constantina Saﬁlios-
Rothschild, “Dual Linkages Between the Occupational and Family System: A Macrosoci-ological Analysis,” in W omen and the W orkplace , eds. Martha Blaxall and Barbara Reagan
(Chicago, 1976), pp. 51–60.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
possible for women to combine work and family responsibilities. But, in
the absence of an elaborate network of supporting services, and withouta redeﬁnition of cultural norms to support new roles within the family ,some curtailment of female professional aspirations and mobility wasnecessary to preserve the equilibrium of the two-worker family . If thefamily was not to be sacriﬁced to the professional equality of women,equality itself would have to give way .
For the new Soviet heroine, therefore, economic independence had
altered but not destroyed the traditional foundations of marriage. Whileproductivity in economic life was valued and achievement rewarded,female occupational mobility was limited by the competing require-ments of family life. The proud independence of the revolutionaryheroine had faded from literature, along with images of the politicalactivist whose dedication to building the new society overrode all othercommitments and priorities. Male prerogatives in economic and politi-cal life received emphasis, while women were assigned as a high prior-ity the task of producing citizens.
Thus, the acute role strain that was the legacy of the Stalin era was
managed by women through the limitation of family size, on the onehand, or the limitation of professional commitments, on the other. The ofﬁcial insistence that Soviet policy had created optimal conditionsfor combining professional and family responsibilities could not be challenged, nor the problems it created directly confronted, so long asStalinist priorities dominated Soviet life.
Further Reading: Women and Gender in Soviet Society
Lynne Attwood, Creating the New Soviet W oman: W omen’s Magazines as Engineers
of Female Identity , 1922–1953 (New York, 1999).
Frances L. Bernstein, “ ‘The Dictatorship of Sex’: Science, Glands, and the
Medical Construction of Gender Difference in Revolutionary Russia,” inDavid L. Hoffmann and Yanni Kotsonis, eds., Russian Modernity: Politics,
Knowledge, Practices (London, 2000).
Mary Buckley , “The Untold Story of Obshchestvennitsa in the 1930s,”
Europe–Asia Studies , vol. 48, no. 4 (1996).
Choi Chatterjee, Celebrating W omen: Gender , Festival Culture, and Bolshevik 
Ideology, 1910–1939 (Pittsburgh, 2002).
Barbara Evans Clements, Barbara Alpern Engel, Christine D. Worobec, eds.,
Russia’s W omen: Accommodation, Resistance, Transformation (Berkeley , 1991).
Wendy Z. Goldman, W omen, the State and Revolution: Soviet Family Policy and
Social Life, 1917–1936 (New York, 1993).
Anne E. Gorsuch, “ ‘ A Woman is not a Man’: The Culture of Gender and 
Generation in Soviet Russia, 1921–1928,” Slavic Review , vol. 55 (1996).WOMEN IN SOVIET SOCIETY 235
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Melanie Ilic, W omen W orkers in the Soviet Interwar Economy: From ‘Protection’ to
‘Equality’ (New York, 1999).
Melanie Ilic, ed., W omen in the Stalin Era (New York, 2001).
Rosalind Marsh, ed., W omen in Russia and Ukraine (New York, 1996).
Rebecca Balmas Neary , “Mothering Socialist Society: The Wife-Activists’ Move-
ment and the Soviet Culture of Daily Life,” The Russian Review , vol. 58, no. 3
(1999).
Susan Reid, “ All Stalin’s Women: Gender and Power in the Soviet Art of the
1930s,” Slavic Review , vol. 57(1998).
Elizabeth A. Wood, The Baba and the Comrade: Gender and Politics in Revolution-
ary Russia (Bloomington, 1997).236 GAIL WARSHOFSKY LAPIDUS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ethnicity and Nationality
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
10
Nature and Nurture in a Socialist
Utopia: Delineating the SovietSocio-Ethnic Body in the Age ofSocialism
Amir W einer
Excerpted from Amir Weiner, “Nature, Nurture, and Memory in a
Socialist Utopia: Delineating the Soviet Socio-Ethnic Body in theAge of Socialism,” The American Historical Review , vol. 104, no. 4
(1999).
Editor’s Introduction
Stalinism also had strong impact on ethnic and national minorities in 
the Soviet Union. According to Marxist theory, nationalism and nationalidentity were bourgeois phenomena which would fade under socialism.But Soviet authorities in many ways fostered the very national conscious-ness they presumed to supercede. Rather than replacing national identitywith an allegiance to socialism, Soviet nationality policy made ethnic andnational minorities more aware of their distinctiveness. This national con-sciousness subsequently fueled separatist feelings among national minori-ties, and ultimately contributed to the breakup of the Soviet Union in1991.
The Soviet government’s promotion of national identity has been the
subject of important new scholarship in Soviet nationality studies, one ofthe most vibrant subﬁelds in Soviet history over the past decade. Researchon Soviet nationality policy has shown that both the structure and poli-cies of the Soviet government encouraged national consciousness amongethnic minorities. Proceeding from the assumption that repression ofnationalism would only worsen it, Lenin and Stalin granted national insti-tutions to ethnic minorities to try to disarm nationalism and allow theseminorities to evolve beyond national attachments to class consciousness
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and socialism. The structure of the Soviet Union therefore included
national republics and territories, each with their own governing bodiesand national symbols. Moreover, national minority languages were per-mitted to ﬂourish and national elites were recruited into the CommunistParty.
1
In addition to promoting national identity among ethnic minorities
deliberately, the Soviet government engaged in practices of classiﬁca-tion and categorization which inadvertently fostered national conscious-ness. These practices included the drawing of territorial boundaries forrepublics corresponding to each major nationality, though the delineationof geographically based nationalities involved assigning national identitieseven to people who did not identify themselves in national terms. Sovietofﬁcials’ desire to know and manage the population prompted them toconduct censuses, in which they categorized people by their nationality.The internal passports introduced by the Soviet government in 1932 speciﬁed people’s nationality in their passports, so that all citizens had toidentify themselves in terms of their nationality. All of these practicesencouraged or even required people to think of themselves in nationalterms.
2
Over time, Soviet authorities themselves came to see national and
ethnic categories in increasingly absolute terms. Despite the ideas ofMarxism, which viewed nationality as constructed, Stalinist nationalitypolicy increasingly came to treat ethnicity and nationality as primordialand essential.
3Stalinism also entailed extremely coercive policies toward
national minorities, including mass ethnic deportations in the late 1930s,and deportations of entire nationalities after the Second World War.Soviet nationality policy, then, underwent a dramatic and coercive evolu-tion under Stalin. From seeing nationality as a mutable consciousness, theStalinist leadership came to view certain national minorities as undiffer-entiated, irredeemable groups.
Amir Weiner has produced pioneering scholarship both on the origins
of Stalinist excisionary violence, and on the application of state violence240 AMIR WEINER
1Ronald Grigor Suny, The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution, and the Collapse of 
the Soviet Union (Stanford, 1993); T erry Martin, The Afﬁrmative Action Empire: Nations and
Nationalism in the Soviet Union ,1923–1939 (Ithaca, 2001).
2Yuri Slezkine, “The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted
Ethnic Particularism,” Slavic Review , vol. 53, no. 3 (1994); Francine Hirsch, “The Soviet Union
as a Work-in-Progress: Ethnographers and the Category of Nationality in the 1926, 1937,
and 1939 Censuses,” Slavic Review , vol. 56, no. 2 (1997); Jorg Baberowski, “Stalinismus 
als imperials Phanomen: die islamischen Regionen der Sowjetunion, 1921–1941,” in StefanPlaggenborg, ed., Stalinismus: neue Forshungen und Konzepte (Berlin, 1998).
3T erry Martin, “Modernization or Neo-traditionalism? Ascribed Nationality and Soviet 
Primodialism,” in David L. Hoffmann and Yanni Kotsonis, eds., Russian Modernity: Politics,
Knowledge, Practices (New Y ork, 2000).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
to ethnic and national minorities. In the selection below, he describes the
tension within Soviet ideology between nurture and nature. According toMarxism, enemies of socialism were products of their capitalist environ-ment, so they could be reformed and incorporated into the socialist col-lective. But over time, Soviet authorities increasingly came to see enemiesas inveterate “anti-Soviet elements,” and this perspective left no room forre-education or redemption. With the cultivation of ethnic particularism(through the mechanisms described above), Stalin and his fellow leadersincreasingly targeted certain national minorities as enemies – what Weinercalls the ethnicization of the Soviet puriﬁcation drive.
Weiner demonstrates that the Second World War intensiﬁed the 
Stalinist leadership’s drive to purify Soviet society by removing enemies,including national minorities deemed wartime collaborators. Drawingcomparisons with other countries in Europe, he highlights the distinc-tive Soviet treatment of those who collaborated with the Nazis duringthe war. For Soviet authorities, collaborators were not by-products ofwartime occupation but socialism’s eternal enemies which the war haduncovered. Amnesty was out of the question for these enemies; they hadto be removed from society altogether. In cases where collaboration wasseen in ethnic terms, the Stalinist leadership ordered the deportation of entire peoples, such as the Crimean Tatars. Ukrainian nationalists,who during and after the war fought for independence from the SovietUnion, were summarily shot, with no opportunity for re-education orrehabilitation.
In the wake of the war, Soviet leaders also began to view Jews as an
alien group in society. Jews were described as immune to assimilation, andhence an exception to the Marxist principle of nurture over nature. Per-secution of Jews soon followed and ofﬁcial Soviet anti-semitism reachedits peak in 1953 during the so-called Doctors’ Plot, when prominentJewish doctors were arrested and accused of plotting to murder Stalinand other leaders. But as Weiner argues, the Jewish case underscored a crucial distinction between the Soviet and Nazi regimes. The Sovietsconsistently rejected the biological determinism and virulent racism of theNazis. Even at the height of the Soviet anti-semitic campaign, hundreds ofthousands of Jews remained Communist Party members, including LazarKaganovich, one of Stalin’s closest lieutenants. Moreover, Soviet exci-sionary practices, even as they assumed the form of ethnic deportations,never included industrial killing and genocide, as was true of Nazi stateviolence.
The Second World War, then, accelerated the Stalinist puriﬁcation
drive, and led to the totalization of ethnic categories. Indeed, as Weinershows, this acceleration was linked with the Soviet concept of histor-ical time and the postwar belief that the ﬁnal stage of history was fastNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 241
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
approaching. T o prepare for the communist utopia, Stalin and his fellow
leaders strove all the more relentlessly to eliminate those who violatedthe country’s “moral-political unity,” including national minorities accusedof wartime collaboration. But despite Soviet authorities’ increasing ten-dency to view enemies as irredeemable, Marxist ideology and the privi-leging of nurture over nature continued to inform Soviet policies. Stalinistexcisionary practices, even when totalized, never derived from a genoci-dal ideology and never introduced exterminatory institutions.242 AMIR WEINER
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Nature and Nurture in a Socialist
Utopia: Delineating the Soviet Socio-Ethnic Body in the Age of Socialism
Amir W einer
In the wake of the disintegration of the Soviet polity , scholars have 
thoroughly reevaluated basic categories in Soviet history such as class, ethnicity , and nationality , as well as the policies associated withthem. Amazingly enough, however, with rare exceptions, these cate-gories and policies have been treated as the context for evaluating Soviet practices rather than being contextualized themselves. This essayseeks to advance the current discussion by situating these conceptswithin the overarching Soviet enterprise: the unfolding revolutionarytransformation of society from an antagonistically divided entity into a conﬂict-free, harmonious body . The view of society as a malleable construct went hand in hand with a continuous puriﬁcation campaignseeking to eliminate divisive and obstructing elements. Exclusion andviolence, in this light, were not random or merely preventive police measures that delineated the boundaries of the legitimate and the permissible but, rather, integral parts of the ongoing community-structuring enterprise. I trace the rationale of the Soviet Marxist questfor purity by focusing on three crucial components: the correlationbetween the progression of the revolutionary time line and the mea-sures taken to realize the socialist utopia, the impact of Nazism and capitalism on the Soviet political and social calculus, and the sites ofexcision. The marked emphasis on ideology does not deny nor diminishthe impact of circumstances, especially those of the magnitude experi-enced during World War II, or the role of institutions such as the polit-ical police, the NKVD, which had a vested interest in a permanent purge.It does explain, however, why the Soviets reacted in the unique way theydid to the same circumstances experienced by other polities, why theirunique punitive institutions were created in the ﬁrst place, and why theregime pursued its puriﬁcation campaigns well after the conditions thatinitiated them had dissipated.
Marxist regimes struggled with assigning primacy to either the “objec-
tive” category of class origin or to the “subjective” criteria of conduct
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and experience. In polities founded on the Marxist premise of the
primacy of acculturation, but simultaneously engaged in the constanteradication of social strata presumed to be illegitimate, the tensionbetween nurture and nature was constant. It intensiﬁed as the Sovietpolity advanced along the road to socialism and communism and radi-calized its puriﬁcation policies both qualitatively and quantitatively . Following the establishment of socialism and especially in the wake ofWorld War II, social and ethnic categories and practices were totalizedin a marked shift: enemy groups previously considered to be differenti-ated, reformable, and redeemable were now viewed as undifferentiated,unreformable, and irredeemable collectives. This totalization of theMarxist sociological paradigm challenged the commitment to theprimacy of nurture over nature in the ongoing social engineeringproject, inviting comparison with contemporary biological-racial para-digms, most notably , that of Nazi Germany – a comparison the Sovietswere well aware of yet wanted to avoid at all costs. The absence of geno-cidal ideology and institutions allowed for different modes and sites of total excision from the socio-ethnic body within the socialist utopia.Still, Soviet contemporaries continued to confront the ever-presentshadow of the biological-racial ethos.
The Soviet puriﬁcation drive operated on a universal–particularistic
axis, combining the modern European ethos of social engineering withBolshevik Marxist eschatology . Their fusion created a stable menu ofcategories and practices and a dynamic mode of applying them. TheSoviet state emerged and operated within an ethos aptly named byZygmunt Bauman as the “gardening state,” which appeared ever moreuniversal in the wake of the Great War. This cataclysmic event broughtto fruition the desires for a comprehensive plan for the transformationand management of society , one that would create a better, purer, andmore beautiful community through the removal of unﬁt human weeds.It was, in a word, an aesthetic enterprise. The unprecedented increasein the capacities and aspirations of the state went hand in hand withthe view of society as raw material to be molded into an ideal image.The transformation – or removal – of the individual and the communitybecame the accepted goal of the state both in its welfare and its punitivepolicies. . . .
Whatever its ideological coloring, social engineering possessed a
tremendous capacity for violence. The mobilization of the legal andmedical professions for the goal of perfecting society shifted the politicaldiscourse to new realms. The pretense of scientiﬁc criteria and measuresto study and work on the population meant that the state would employthe most advanced and radical tools in its quest for a purer, better society .The urge to maximize the management of society gave birth to a myriad244 AMIR WEINER
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
of institutions for activities such as passport control, surveillance, and
physical and mental cataloguing, without which the radical transfor-mation of populations could not have taken place. And it was perfectlylogical that the most radical forms of mass extermination were precededby smaller scale destruction of groups categorized as incompatible andirredeemable both medically and legally , then supplemented by military-industrial methods of operation.
Where the paradigm of modernity falls short is by not providing 
a satisfactory explanation for the evolution of puriﬁcation drives in 
totalitarian systems. If the urge to perfect societies stemmed from theuniversal axis of modernity , its implementation acted on clearly par-ticularistic urges. First, the “gardening state” blossomed throughoutEurope no less than in the Soviet Union. In the wake of the Great War,the European political landscape was marked by planned economies,elaborate surveillance systems, and thoroughly politicized eugenicsresearch. Yet it was the Soviet polity that ended up with teleology as itseconomic modus operandi alongside a system of concentration camps,mass deportations, and killings. Indeed, the Soviets went out of theirway to underline this difference. Unlike the Philistines who constantlylament brutality and the loss of lives and preach reconciliation, the ulti-mate goal of the social engineering project – a genuine moral-politicalunity of society – could be reached only through an irreconcilable andviolent struggle, declared Soviet ideologues. Second, the campaign toeradicate internal enemies within the totalitarian state intensiﬁed after
all residues of political opposition had been crushed and, in the Sovietcase, following the declaration that Socialism had been built. Terrorbecomes total, Hannah Arendt observed, when it becomes independentof all opposition.
The key to the distinctive development of the Soviets’ puriﬁcation
drive lay in the volatile fusion of historical time and its ultimate goal. It was an eschatological worldview in the sense of belief in an end toHistory; it was apocalyptic in its belief in the imminence of the End and that, in the wake of reaching socialism, Soviet people were living atthe ﬁnal stages of History; it was millenarian in its belief that the ﬁnalcataclysm would be followed by the kingdom of communism, namely aconﬂict-free and harmonious society , the very feature that set it apartfrom other totalitarian enterprises, which espoused a cyclical concep-tion of time and envisioned an endless struggle for domination and sur-vival. The quest for purity was neatly tied to thedistinguishing aspect of
the Bolshevik utopia: from the moment of its establishment in power,the Soviet regime imposed a time line marking concrete stations on theroad to realization of the communist utopia. Thus in 1947, the draft ofthe party program set the goal of “building of a communist society inNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 245
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the USSR in the course of the next twenty to thirty years,” and in 1948,
a leading political theoretician could declare conﬁdently that,
if it was possible to organize a socialist society on the whole within twenty
years from the moment of the triumph of Soviet power under the mostdifﬁcult circumstances, then it is entirely possible to assume that after the triumphant conclusion of the Patriotic War and the restoration of theruined people’s economy , two more decades will be enough to roughlyerect the highest stage of communism. Therefore, the generation which in
1920 was ﬁfteen to twenty years old will live in a communist society.
1
A year later, communism was said to be around the corner, with 
each day bringing forward more evidence of the triumphant march to communism, including the markers of communist harmony – liquidation of the great schisms between mental and physical labor and between town and village – as the ﬁrst secretary of the All-UnionLeninist Communist League of Youth (Komsomol) assured the delegatesto the Eleventh Congress of the organization in March–April 1949. The“overwhelming majority” of Soviet youth, noted another secretary ,already possessed “all the elements of the character of the man of Com-munist society .”
2On the eve of the Nineteenth Party Congress in
October 1952, Stalin threw his personal weight behind the matter whenhe sought in his last major work on Economic Problems of Socialism in the
USSR to rush the march toward the higher stage of communism by 
creating a central barter system that would replace collective farm property and commodity exchange in the countryside, which he viewedas the last existing obstacles to a full-blown communist economy . Andwith the addition of the new socialist “shock brigades” – the People’sDemocracies in East Asia and Europe – which altered the pre-war isolation, “the mighty motherland” was said to be in the ﬂower of itsstrength, possessing “everything necessary for building of a completecommunist society .”
3
These time markers had a direct impact on the deﬁnition of the
“weeds” intruding on the harmonious garden and the measures takento uproot them. Groups and individuals perceived to be hostile were continuously referred to in biological-hygienic terms, whether vermin246 AMIR WEINER
1Indeed, this conﬁdent prediction was presented as a “scientiﬁc answer to the question
on the historical epochs of building communism [that] we ﬁnd in the writings of Leninand Stalin.” Tsolak Stepanian, “Usloviia i puti perekhoda ot sotsializma k kommunizmu,”in F . Konstantinov , et al., O sovetskom obshchestve: Sbornik statei (Moscow, 1948), 539,
540, 542, italics in the original.
2Komsomol’skaia pravda , March 30 and April 2, 1949.
3See the speeches by Georgii Malenkov and Stalin at the Nineteenth Party Congress,
Pravda , October 6 and 15, 1952.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
(parazity, vrediteli ), pollution ( zasorenost’ ), or ﬁlth ( griaz’ ), and were sub-
jected to ongoing puriﬁcation. Yet the implications of this biological-hygienic rhetoric were not static. With the declaration of Socialism built,the victorious outcome of the Great Patriotic War, and communism in sight, the eradication of “this debris of the old world, a weed thatsomehow grew up between the stones of our radiant building,”
4
assumed even more urgency . In his well-known speech at the February–March 1937 plenary session of the Central Committee, Stalin explicitly identiﬁed the new type of internal enemy in the age ofsocialism, the elusive one, a theme that he had already begun to developin 1933 at the completion of collectivization. Since ofﬁcial ideology andits institutional implementation were infallible, errors and failures couldbe attributed only to the ill-will of individuals. After several decades ofsocialism in power and constant purges, the continued existence of suchhuman weeds must be a result of their devious and elusive nature. Likea cancer, they mutated themselves in different forms and various loca-tions. And since this vermin could not repent, it had to be removed fromthe body in its entirety . The question was only how . The former brand ofinternal enemies, argued Stalin, was openly hostile to the Soviet causeby virtue of social origin and professional orientation and could not bemistaken for anything other than that. The new saboteurs, on the otherhand, were “mostly party people, with a party card in the pocket, i.e.,people who formally are not alien. Whereas the old vermin turnedagainst our people, the new vermin, on the contrary , cringe before ourpeople, extol our people, bow before them in order to win their trust.”
5
Such enemies, reasoned Stalin, would resort to the most extreme mea-sures in their struggle against the Soviet state. The latter must guaran-tee the excision of this vermin from its midst.
Stalin’s warning was repeatedly invoked in the postwar purge cam-
paigns but with an additional edge. The moral-political unity gained bythe relentless and thorough purge was posited against the proliferationof “ﬁfth columns” in the rest of Europe, which, in the Soviet view, wasa major factor in its quick collapse before the Nazi onslaught. With theannouncement in mid-January 1953 of the uncovering of the “Doctors’Plot,” a group of physicians, the majority of whom were Jews, accusedof plotting to murder Soviet leaders, Komsomol’skaia pravda reminded
Soviet youth that even when defeated the enemy does not rest. “HavingNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 247
4Komsomol’skaia pravda , February 12, 1953.
5I. Stalin, “O nedostatkakh partiinoi raboty i merakh likvidatsii trotskistskikh i inykh
dvurushnikov: Doklad na Plenume TsK VKP (b) 3 Marta 1937,” Bol’shevik 7 (1937): 7.
See Hiroaki Kuromiya’s examination of the January 1933 speech in his Freedom and
Terror in the Donbas: A Ukrainian-Russian Borderland, 1870s–1990s (Cambridge, 1998),
184–5.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
won the war we turned to construction again because we love life and
youth, because we want to make our land a ﬂourishing garden. Butwhile we build we must remember that the enemy will continue to sendspies onto our home front, to recruit all kinds of scum in order to under-mine our strength, to poison our joyous, happy life . . . the greater the
successes in building communism in the USSR, the more active and vilethe operations of the imperialists and their myrmidons,” concluded thecall for vigilance. Like the biblical serpent, these enemies were the mostelusive imaginable. “The spies and saboteurs sent to us by the imperial-ist intelligence services or recruited by them within the country fromamong incompletely routed anti-Soviet scum do not operate openly .They operate ‘on the sly ,’ they mask themselves in the guise of Sovietpersons to penetrate our institutions and organizations, to worm theirway into conﬁdence and conduct their foul work,” was Izvestiia ’s edito-
rial from the same day . An unwaivering vigilance was required in orderto “ensure the cleansing of people’s minds from the survivals of capi-talism, from the prejudices and harmful traditions of the old society ,”concluded the editorial.
6
The arrival of socialism ordained new sites of excision. First, with the
destruction of antagonistic classes, internal enemies became enemies of the people and were to be sought in new realms. By then, it was thenationality question that harbored the clearest and most present dangerto the moral-political unity of all the people, declared Stalin in the Seventeenth Party Congress of 1934, underlining the increasing ethni-cization of the Soviet social body and the shift in the search for theenemy within. The ﬁght against recurrences of nationalist views hadbecome the most critical task in the struggle against the last vestiges ofcapitalism in the consciousness of people, echoed Dmitrii Chesnokov , aprominent party ideologue, in 1952. The residue of “zoological” chau-vinism, especially in regions that were temporarily exposed to fascistpropaganda during the German occupation, represented a stubbornintrusion on Soviet harmony and called for the most severe measures ifharmony was to be maintained, Chesnokov concluded.
7
Second, Soviet relations to the parallel modern politics across the
European continent were not merely phenomenological. Rather, theSoviets were constantly checking their methods in the European mirror.The anxiety of potential degeneration into a zoological ethos wasstrongly present in the minds of Soviet contemporaries. Throughout the 1930s, Soviet leaders, notably Stalin himself, reacted vehemently248 AMIR WEINER
6Komsomol’skaia pravda , January 15, 1953; Izvestiia , January 15, 1953.
7Dmitrii Chesnokov , Sovetskoe sotsialisticheskoe gosudarstvo (Moscow, 1952), 209. The
necessity for coercion in the age of harmony and socialist democracy was hammered outby Chesnokov throughout the entire exhaustive text. See 246, 556.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
against any suggestion that their sociologically based model of the
human subject could be equated with any biologically based, geneticallycoded enterprise, whether the racial Nazi polity or eugenics andeuthanasia policies, which enjoyed widespread acceptance during thatdecade. When the totalization of categories and practices in the wake of the war drove home the inevitable comparison with the Nazi racial-biological code, the Soviets went out of their way to emphasize that their destruction of internal enemies was not genocidal and that, unlikethe death camps, their own penal system remained true to its cor-rective mandate.
The speciﬁc sites of puriﬁcation derived from this anxiety . The acute
Soviet awareness of being equated with the Nazi racial-biological enter-prise and the fact that total excision did not necessarily imply physicalelimination pointed to other sites of puriﬁcation in addition to deporta-tions or executions. Memory was a key political arena where the bodysocial was delineated. Inclusion and exclusion within the Soviet bodywere deﬁned to a large degree through both the commemoration of cat-aclysmic events and the simultaneous erasure of the counter-memoriesof groups and events deemed incompatible with communist harmony .In the highly stylized Soviet polity , hierarchies of commemorationreﬂected the political status of groups. World War II played a central rolein this process, especially as the experience of the war turned into thecore legitimizing myth of the Soviet polity , along with the denunciationand removal of some key elements of the Stalinist regime and the routinization of other fundamentals of the revolutionary ethos. The ex-clusion of certain groups from ofﬁcial representations of the wartimeSoviet ﬁghting family and the denial of particularistic suffering destinedgroups to political invisibility , depriving them of ofﬁcial recognition oftheir distinct, collective identities.
This essay examines the varieties of the Soviet puriﬁcation drives 
as they evolved in relation to two groups that came to epitomize theobstacles to harmony from the late 1930s on: the Ukrainian national-ist movement (a political-ideological effort identiﬁed with its place oforigin, Western Ukraine, but often substituted for the entire Ukrainiannation) and the Jewish minority . The sites of the Soviet drive exploredhere are the central-western regions of Ukraine, which served as a laboratory for social-ethnic engineering for every political movementthat gained the upper hand there, beginning with the deportations of Germans, Poles, and Jews by the czarist government in 1915, and followed by the upheavals of the civil war, collectivization drive, andfamine. From the early 1930s, the population in these regions was subjected to consecutive deportations of ethnic minorities and mass executions during the Terror, followed by Nazi population policies andNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 249
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ukrainian nationalist ethnocentric policies, and ﬁnally by the resump-
tion of the Soviet puriﬁcation drive in the wake of World War II. Thehistory of these regions offers a unique insight into the evolution ofSoviet population policies.
As the Nazi war machine began to roll back across the European conti-
nent, nations appeared determined to exact revenge on those deemedcollaborators with the Nazi occupiers. Following humiliating defeatsand years of occupation, the purge of the national body became theorder of the day . On the surface, the European puriﬁcation enterpriseappeared universal and grappled with common core dilemmas regard-ing its form, extent, limits, and categories.
In their search for solutions to these dilemmas, nations referred pri-
marily to familiar paradigms. Indeed, most European countries had hadprior experience in mass exclusionary and reintegrative social opera-tions. In the wake of the Great War, during which many of these nationshad been occupied, European countries acquired rich experience in theuse of amnesty legislation and the resocialization of political opponentsand criminal offenders, albeit with different degrees of success andpopular approval. For instance, bitter debates over the reintegration ofWorld War I collaborators took place in Belgium, which delayedamnesty legislation until 1937, while in the Netherlands the resocial-ization policy of criminal offenders was enacted methodically throughan extensive network of prison and aftercare associations, includingchurches and trade unions. It came as no surprise that the relapse ofsome of the rehabilitated collaborators in Belgium into similar criminalbehavior during the Second World War worked to toughen attitudestoward amnesty and rehabilitation, while in the Netherlands the reso-cialization programs and facilities for criminals were easily converted toreintegrate their World War II black sheep.
Less expected was the early realization that the prosecution of
collaborators was not a challenge to the pre-war order but, rather, amanifestation of its continued power. A full investigation of collabora-tion – and not merely of those who served in the German punitive andpropaganda institutions – threatened to open a Pandora’s box of de facto accommodation by many of the sitting bureaucratic, judicial, andeconomic elites. In essence, the entire existing order. And since the latter showed no signs of acquiescence, the debate soon devolved intopartisan politics. Public life under Nazi occupation was left out of theinvestigation, as were numerous high ofﬁcials who ﬁt well into the re-newed conservative order. While the postwar European state was busilyextending its domain into practically every sphere of society , the temp-tation to recall strayed, yet seasoned, bureaucrats was easily rational-250 AMIR WEINER
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ized. The impact of the unfolding Cold War could not be ignored, either.
In Hungary , a tiny communist party vying for more members opted formass recruitment of none other than the rank-and-ﬁle of the ArrowCross, the fascist organization now in disgrace whose class orientationwas deemed more important than its political past. On both sides of theEuropean divide, the developing conﬂict dictated a facade of nationalunity . Unpleasant and painful reminders were shelved, or rather erasedfrom the ofﬁcial memory of the war.
Wartime experience, however, deﬁed a universal deﬁnition of collab-
oration. In the vengeful atmosphere of devastated Poland, attendingconcerts at which German music was performed was deemed a col-laborative act by the secret courts. At the same time, in so many coun-tries from France to Norway to Hungary , the very same people bothcollaborated and resisted in accordance with their perceptions andexpectations of German policies and the changing tide of the war.Neither martyrs nor evildoers were in the majority in Nazi-occupiedEurope. And it was precisely this gray mosaic that stood in the way ofnational reconstruction.
At its core, the purge of collaborators was not merely about retribu-
tion or restoration. Deep down, it was about the shaping of postwarsociety . Puriﬁcation was a transitional, medium between the imperfectpast and the improved – if possible, perfect – society of the present andfuture. If the European experience is taken as a whole, it appears that aprecondition for the success of puriﬁcation was an ideal representationof the people as a positive, undifferentiated entity . “The People” as onemythic group had to be exonerated from charges of collaboration. Thecharge of collaboration was assigned to isolated patches of weeds. In aconcrete, tactical calculus, the blame for the initial humiliating defeatsand atrocities would be shifted from segments of one’s own society to analien element. A digniﬁed future required a heroic past. And if the pastwas to be a guide to the future, it had to be painted in crisp colors. Noshades of gray would interfere with the heroic tale of the strugglebetween good and evil. And so, as quickly as the vengeful spirits arose,so, too, did they abate. All over Europe, retribution against alleged col-laboration faded away at a truly amazing pace, and arguments in favorof the reintegration of convicted collaborators surfaced shortly after theend of the hostilities.
The Soviet experience, too, pointed to an earlier paradigm, but one
that accentuated the sharp distinctions between totalitarian and otherpolitical enterprises. The Soviet policy of purge was not merely reactive.Nor was it conditioned by tactical requirements. Rather, puriﬁcation andreintegration were complementary components of the colossal projectof building a new socialist polity . Speciﬁc developments in the domesticNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 251
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and international arena affected the choices of targets, but the goals and
methods of dealing with these targeted groups and individuals weresubjected to an ongoing endeavor of restructuring. If the study ofthe horrifying wartime losses and destruction helps to explain the harsh retaliation of the Soviets, then the reading of the war into the progressing revolutionary narrative elucidates the unique choices of methods.
The war was not merely an unpleasant accident, nor was it a cus-
tomary clash between two major powers. It was the realization of a his-torical nightmare, one that Soviet power expected from the moment ofits inception. Throughout the 1930s, Soviet citizens were constantlywarned against the evils of German fascism and its implications for theUSSR. The dominant theme of the Terror in 1937–8 was the excision offascist agents from the Soviet body politic. If the alleged crimes of thesinners in the late 1930s were presumed to anticipate the forthcomingcatastrophe of the capitalist encirclement, then the alleged crimes in the1940s were perceived as the full-blown actualization of the worst fearsof the preceding decade. In the postwar ofﬁcial narrative, the war wasperceived as the inevitable outcome of historical forces. “It would bewrong,” declared Stalin in his election speech on February 9, 1946, “tothink that the Second World War was a casual occurrence or the result of the errors of any particular statesmen, though mistakes weremade. Actually , the war was the inevitable result of the development ofworld economic and political forces on the basis of modern monopolycapitalism.”
8
In this light, collaborators were not the by-products of the war but
eternal enemies whom the war and occupation helped uncover. Theirdestruction was therefore not merely an act of defense but the execu-tion of the Will of History . The passage of time did not work to moder-ate the punitive policies against those accused of collaboration. WhereasFrench politicians were quick to interpret public opinion surveys sup-porting a reconciliation bill as a mandate for enacting amnesty , ValentinOvechkin’s pleas for compassion toward those who went through thehell of occupation remained unheeded. “Solicitude for the welfare oftraitors who helped the Nazis lacerate France shows up the present-daycollaborationists in their true colors. Birds of a feather,” was the bitterreaction of Soviet newspapers when the French National Assemblylaunched the debate over the ﬁnal legislation of mass amnesty for con-victed collaborators in December 1952.
9As Europe was moving fast on252 AMIR WEINER
8I. V . Stalin, “Rech na predvybornom sobranii izbiratelei Stalinskogo Izbiratel’nogo
okruga goroda Moskvy ,” in Stalin, Sochineniia , 3 (16): 2.
9“ Amnesty for Traitors,” New Times (Moscow) 49 (December 3, 1952): 19–20;
“Krestovyi pokhod frantsuzskoi reaktsii,” Izvestiia , December 7, 1952.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the road to amnesty and rehabilitation, the Soviet Union in contrast
intensiﬁed its campaign of retribution.
Ultimately , Soviet puriﬁcation drives were never restrained by cir-
cumstances. The purge of the party – the vanguard of the Soviet polity– was not subject to administrative-managerial requirements, nor didthe admission that many communists had not risen to the occasion forman obstacle to the purged. When the population at large was purged,entire ethnic groups were stigmatized as collaborationist and deportedinto the Soviet interior. Within the grand scheme of social engineering,even the loss of face was not a weighty factor. And no external pressure,such as the European Court exerted on Belgium in 1961, was allowedto interfere with the pursuit of purity .
However, the Soviet puriﬁcation drive was not entirely different from
the European purge. If the postwar experience of Belgium, Czechoslo-vakia, and Yugoslavia is any indication, it appears that multi-ethnic formations in many ways comprised a distinct effort at puriﬁcation.Wherever collaboration was presumed to have had an ethnic face, theprocess of the purge continued well beyond that of the more homo-genous polities and assumed a more vindictive character. Indeed, herelay the gravest challenge to the ideal representation of the “GoodPeople,” a challenge that resonated most clearly in the Soviet Union.One could think, and with considerable justiﬁcation, that the uninhib-ited savagery of the German occupation of the Soviet territories wouldperpetuate the myth of the “Good People” and make the purge of thecollaborationist weeds a common national enterprise. Finding them-selves at the bottom of the Nazi racial hierarchy , the Slavic populationssoon discovered that the various distinctions the Nazis applied to eachof them mattered little in the New Order. But the harmonious repre-sentation of the People collided with the unintended legacy of Sovietpre-war nationality policy . The racially based Nazi ethos had fallen onfertile ground. The principled cultivation of ethnic particularism by theSoviets, be it the creation of ethno-national territories or the ethniciza-tion of the enemy-within category , rendered critical segments of societysusceptible to ethnically based visions and practices. In such a milieu,the occupation of the non-Russian Slavic republics for most of the war,and the slightest preferential treatment by the Germans, triggered con-temporaries’ reﬂection on the consequences of the ethnicized Sovietworld. In many regions, the Soviet nation-building project had to be reconciled with the ethnic legacy of collectivization, famine, and depor-tations. Similarly , the postwar translation of ethnically based hierar-chies of heroism into hierarchies of loyalty was a powerful challenge tothe myth of the “Good People.” This leads us to consider brieﬂy thenature of the Soviet puriﬁcation drive as it evolved prior to the cataclysmNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 253
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
of World War II, against which background the magnitude of the
postwar cleansing must be measured.
In a polity built on the premise of “national in form, socialist in
content,” ethnicity was not expected to become the primary category insocial engineering. Early on, however, the brutal experience of the DonCossacks during the Russian civil war and the suspicion cast on thePolish and German minorities throughout the 1920s made it clear that this neat distinction between form and content was difﬁcult tomaintain. As the Soviet crusade approached the realm of socialism, thetenuous balance between social and ethnic origins increasingly tilted inthe direction of the latter. True, class would continue to be the raison
d’être of the revolutionary enterprise to the very end, a concept written
into the structure of each and every Soviet institution. It was not fornothing that Stalin, the very person who renounced class heredity as adetrimental factor in determining political legitimacy , went out of hisway to scorn party members in the Seventeenth Party Congress who“dropped into a state of foolish rapture in the expectation that soonthere will be no classes and therefore no class struggle.”
10But over-
shadowed by Stalin’s often-quoted remark was the addendum that thesurvivals of capitalism were “much more tenacious in the sphere of thenational problem . . . because they are able to disguise themselves in
national costume.”
11The threats to the aspired harmony assumed an
ethnic face.
The conﬂation of class and ethnic categorization resurfaced with a
vengeance once collectivization began. Soviet power forcefully drovehome the ethnicization of class-enemy categories, especially whenapplied to the ethnic mosaic of the border regions. Already at the onsetof the assault on the well-off peasants, or kulaks, in January 1930, localparty organizations were ordered by the Ukrainian Central Committeeto “devise special perspectives with regard to the national minorities districts (Germans, Bulgarians, and others).”
12And since Poles – as 
well as Germans and Jews – were perceived as kulaks by nature, theywere marked for collectivization regardless of socioeconomic status.
The ascendance of ethnicity within the excision enterprise was
further accentuated when deportations commenced in March 1930.The Politburo’s order speciﬁcally targeted ethnic Poles irrespective ofthe stage of collectivization and regardless of their material posi-tion. Indeed, only half of those deportees from the border belt of the254 AMIR WEINER
10I. V . Stalin, “Otchetnyi doklad XVII s”ezdu partii,” in Sochineniia , 13 (Moscow, 1951),
351.
11Stalin, “Otchetnyi doklad XVII s”ezdu partii,” 361.
12P A VO, f. 29, op. 1, d. 577, l. 133.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Ukrainian Republic in 1930 were classiﬁed as kulaks. With socialism
built, ethnic hostility replaced class antagonism as the primary categoryintruding on harmony , a shift that was underscored when the puriﬁca-tion drive accelerated in the mid-1930s. Well before deportationsresumed in early 1935, every ethnic German living in the Soviet Unionwas “individually registered to the fullest extent” and his or her personal data transmitted to the Central Committee.
13On November 5,
1934, the Central Committee in Moscow ordered local authoritiesthroughout the Soviet Union to “remove the hostile anti-Soviet elementfrom the German villages and deport them out of the region and to applythe harshest methods against the most active ones.” The decree wasimplemented despite awareness of a steep decline in the absolutenumber of ethnic Germans in the border regions during the precedingperiod.
14
The ethnicization of categories intensiﬁed the drive to homogenize
the Soviet body social. Those marked for deportation were classiﬁed as“undesirable elements,” and the enterprise was ofﬁcially characterizedas a “cleansing of the mass pollution of the [Polish] national villageSoviets.”
15Hand in hand, scores of national soviets and schools were
declared artiﬁcial and counterrevolutionary institutions. On the path tocommunism, the reference to any structure as an artiﬁcial creation bya foreign organization marked it as a weed to be uprooted from the Sovietgarden. It seemed no accident that district authorities were ordered toexplain to parents that children should be instructed in their “mothertongue,” and consequently several hundred schools were converted to Ukrainian language schools.
16The same rationale was offered in 
late 1937 when the Organizational Bureau of the Central Committee(Orgburo) decreed the liquidation of a large number of national districtsand village Soviets (German, Polish, Estonian, Finnish, Koreans, Bul-garians, and others) throughout the entire union. The Orgburo declaredthem to be artiﬁcial creations that did not correspond to their nationalcomposition and, even worse, the creations of “enemies of the peopleled by bourgeois nationalists and spies.”
17Simultaneously , the Far 
East region was cleared of all ethnic Koreans, and large numbers ofNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 255
13Ingeborg Fleischhauer and Benjamin Pinkus, The Soviet Germans: Past and Present
(London, 1986), 90.
14P A VO, f. 136, op. 3, d. 225, ll. 23–31.
15Tsentral’nyi derzhavnyi arkhiv hromads’kykh ob”iednan’ Ukrainy (hereafter,
TsDAHOU), f. 1, op. 16, d. 12, ll. 39, 280; GARF , f. 5446, op. 16a, d. 265, l. 14.
16P A VO, f. 136, op. 3, d. 371, l. 5: P A VO, f. 136. op. 6, d. 591, ll. 1–3, 11.
17The Central Committee approved the resolution on December 17. Tsentr Khraneniia
Sovremennykh Dokumentov (hereafter, TsKhSD), f. 89, op. 62, d. 6, l. 14; d. 4, l. 1;RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 114, d. 829, ll. 119, 121, 123–6.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Germans, Poles, and Latvians were arrested or executed regardless of
their social class, occupation, or geographical location. In some Ukrain-ian regions, arrests and executions eliminated almost all Germans andPoles.
Finally , the Terror delivered a brutal message regarding the limits of
redemption in the wake of triumphalistic socialism. In his canonizationof the history of the Communist Party , the Short Course , Stalin cele-
brated the physical annihilation of the elusive enemies who managed tosurvive previous cycles of puriﬁcation. With Socialism built, extermi-nation was the only way to cope with those who had not yet redeemedthemselves. It seemed no accident that the ﬁrst salvo of the ensuingterror was directed at the punished and pardoned. Indeed, the latterﬁgured prominently in the Politburo resolution of July 2, 1937, “Con-cerning Anti-Soviet Elements.” Having been punished and stripped oftheir hostile class identity , these individuals and groups appeared tohave redeemed themselves through productive labor, which won themnot only the restoration of voting rights but also the release of somefrom the special settlements. Indeed, only two years earlier, the rehabil-itation of former kulaks was trumpeted as the triumph of nurture overnature. Celebrating the completion of the White Sea Canal, the authorsof the special commemorative volume noted that “on the whole kulakswere the hardest to educate . . . but even in these half-animals , the 
idolaters of private property , the truth of collective labor at last under-
mined a zoological individualism .”
18Accordingly , on January 25, 1935, all
former kulaks regained their voting rights. But two and a half yearslater, the Central Committee identiﬁed recently rehabilitated formerkulaks as the principal anti-Soviet element, responsible for a barrage ofdiversionary acts in the countryside. In spite of regaining their civilrights and permission to return from exile to their homes, they hadallegedly resumed hostilities against the socialist state. In essence, theyproved to be immune to socialist corrective measures and were con-sequently irredeemable. They were marked for immediate arrest andexecution. In the era of socialism, redemption was not offered twice.
Still, the pre-war cleansing policies maintained several key features
that set them apart from those of the postwar era. First, they aimedlargely at cleansing speciﬁc territorial space – mainly border regionspopulated by minorities with an external active homelands – or politi-cally suspicious segments of these communities, but not entire peoples,which meant that targeted groups were treated as differentiated entities.256 AMIR WEINER
18Belomor: An Account of The Construction of the New Canal between the White Sea and the
Baltic Sea , Maxim Gorky , L. Auerbach and S. G. Firin, eds. (New York, 1935), 341, italics
added.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The lists of deportees from villages with “concentrated Polish and
German populations” were to include “independent peasants who didnot fulﬁll their obligations to the government and unreliable collectivefarmers [ kolkhozniki ],” just as the arrest and execution lists for these
nationalities at the height of the Terror consisted of mainly politicalémigrés, alleged spies, and people working in sensitive industries.Equally important, deportees often remained within the boundaries ofthe Ukrainian Republic. Hence, even after the conclusion of repetitivewaves of deportations, border regions were still populated by tens ofthousands of members of the deported groups, just as members of themarked groups residing outside the targeted region were left unharmed,notably including Koreans.
Second, differentiation often left the door open for possible redemp-
tion. The GULAG doors kept revolving, with 20 to 40 percent of theinmates released annually . Rehabilitation of deported kulaks continuedthroughout the second half of the 1930s. The Council of People’sCommissars Resolution on October 22, 1938, provided children offormer kulaks with internal passports and the right to move to theirplace of choice (with the exception of closed districts), a right that ele-vated them not only above their previous status but also above the restof the Soviet peasantry , which was deprived of passports and hence theright of free movement. Surveillance reports on deportees divided theminto subgroups corresponding to their potential for redemption. Hencethe 15,000 ethnic Germans deported in the spring of 1936 were splitinto a ﬁrst group composed mostly of demobilized Red Army service-men, who responded to the resettlement with optimism; a second groupthat felt cheated but could be redeemed with the right dose of pro-paganda; and a third, whose expectations of a German invasion anduniﬁcation with their German brethren marked them as hopeless. Consequently , ethnic Germans throughout the Soviet Union were stillregarded as reliable enough to be drafted into the Red Army , a policy thatwas bound to change only after this minority (and others) was targetedin its entirety with the outbreak of the war. Even Koreans residingoutside the Far East were inducted into the Red Army , and their wartimeexploits would be recognized and rewarded by the Soviet state.
Notably , the war itself soon became a redemptive vehicle for pre-war
outcasts. On April 11, 1942, the State Defense Committee (GKO) passeda resolution that allowed the drafting of former kulaks into militaryservice. The spouses and children of the draftees were released from thespecial settlements and received passports. In 1943 alone, this cohortamounted to 102,520 people. As the head of the GULAG administra-tion noted with unconcealed satisfaction, many of those released servedwith distinction, including ﬁve who had received the nation’s highestNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 257
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
award, Hero of the Soviet Union. Inmates, including “politicals” of the
Terror era, were encouraged to follow these examples and win their wayback into society . Nor should the release of some 43,000 Poles catego-rized as members of an “enemy nation” merely two years before beignored. In 1944, the NKVD and the USSR Procuracy agreed not toprosecute former kulaks who left the special settlements for variouswartime services and failed to return. Mass rehabilitation intensiﬁed inthe postwar years. In 1946, the regime removed all limitations imposedon the families of former kulaks who had children in the Soviet Army ,were participants in the Great Patriotic War, or received governmentalawards, and on women who married local residents.
With World War II, the ethnicization of categories of the enemy
within came full circle. An apparent consequence of the wartimeredemption was the substitution of ethnicity for class as the dominantinmate category in the Soviet penal system. On the eve of the war, 90.9 percent of the 977,000 people recorded living in the special set-tlements were classiﬁed as kulaks or family members of kulaks. But onthe eve of the ﬁnal wave of releases in early 1954, members of the1929–33 generation numbered only 17,348 people. By then, thevacuum created by the release of 975,000 camp inmates to the frontbetween 1941 and 1944 was ﬁlled with inmates from the nationalitiesdeported during the war, the newly annexed Baltics, western Ukraine,and Belorussia.
The war saw a stark shift in the purge policies from cleansing certain
spaces to cleansing peoples in toto. The pre-war focus on speciﬁc borderregions was replaced by the targeting of each and every member of astigmatized group regardless of geographical location or service ren-dered to the Soviet state. Whatever anxieties and inhibitions that hadbrought to a halt excision campaigns like that against the Cossacks in1919 were now removed. Excision was intended to be total, irreversible,and pursued relentlessly . The treatment of ethnic Germans served as amodel for this new stage. Hence the decree on the resettlement of theVolga Germans on August 28, 1941, was followed by decrees thatextended resettlement to all ethnic Germans in the Soviet Union andthat ordered the removal of all ethnic Germans from the ranks of theﬁghting Red Army . Remarkably , the decrees followed an earlier ofﬁcialrecognition of the voluntary enrollment of the community for the Sovietcause and the heroic ﬁght of some of its members against the Naziinvaders. Moreover, as one scholar aptly observed, the deportation res-olution was framed as a prophylactic measure rather than a punitiveone, where the Germans were accused of harboring scores of diver-sionist and hostile attitudes to Soviet power as opposed to performing258 AMIR WEINER
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
concrete anti-Soviet acts. The same applied to all other ethnic groups
marked for excision in the wake of the war. Whereas during the pre-warera the presence of relatives who had served in the Red Army or par-tisan detachments was enough to protect kulak families from beingdeported, by the end of World War II, ofﬁcers and soldiers of thedeported nationalities were severed from their units, often to be sent to the newly established special regime camps or work battalions whilethe war was still being waged. As indicated by the assault on the com-munal structure of the above communities as well as the Jewish com-munity , the postwar calculus was indifferent to the security of theborders and the existence of hostile external homelands of stigmatizednationalities. The enemy within was ostracized and acted on as a total-ity . Those convicted of political crimes were exiled indeﬁnitely uponcompletion of their sentences. With the building of communism set as a political goal and with a time line in place, the belief in the mal-leability of the human subject in general and of internal enemies in particular eroded. 
Wartime conditions, especially in the occupied territories, furthered
ethnonational divisions, for example, German differentiation of POWs(such as the release of ethnic Ukrainians), the passivity of the majorityof the population, and the fact that the partisan movement was dis-proportionally populated by ethnic Russians. Already during the war,the Soviet criminalization of passivity (directed against the “hubbies”hiding behind women’s skirts, as one partisan leader referred to thosewho claimed to be terrorized by the prospects of Nazi retaliation)assumed a clear ethnic face. Finally , the ferocious clashes with nation-alist separatist movements signiﬁcantly contributed to the hardening of Soviet attitudes toward domestic enemies. But wartime circum-stances alone cannot account for the qualitative shift in the Soviet puriﬁcation drive. Their meaning for and impact on contemporariescould not be detached from the preceding Soviet experience and treatedas universal. The endurance and institutionalization of state revengeagainst those identiﬁed as internal enemies set the Soviet Union apartfrom other European countries and the United States, and points to another explanation. Wartime circumstances were read into the progressing narrative of the revolution, which was itself undergoingchange at the time.
Reﬂecting on his wartime experience in Yugoslavia, Milovan Djilas, then
a communist partisan leader, rationalized the execution of the leadersof a certain clan, whose members were friendly to the communist par-tisans, as the failure of some of its members to subject their “primevalclan ties” and loyalties to that of their political organization. The NATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 259
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
agitated members of the Tadic clan were executed together with royal
ofﬁcers, “not merely for economy but to associate the fate of partyenemies with that of outside enemies.” This ideological commitment,noted Djilas, allowed for opponents, whoever they were, to be dealt within summary fashion.
19Djilas would later conceptualize the role of ide-
ology in the practice of violence. “No matter what your ideology maybe,” said Djilas, “once you believe that you are in the possession of someinfallible truth, you become a combatant in a religious war. There isnothing to prevent you from robbing, burning and slaughtering in thename of your truth, for you are doing it with a perfectly clear conscience– indeed the truth in your possession makes it your duty to pursue it with an iron logic and unwavering will . . . [I]deology demands the 
liquidation of your enemies, real or imagined.”
20With the inspiration of
revolutionary idealism, neither mass brutality in general nor the killingof individuals in particular was considered regrettable or detrimental.Indeed, while the Soviet practice of violence could be and was triggeredby speciﬁc circumstances such as military necessity , its logic wasanchored in ideology . Violence was applied within a well-deﬁned ideo-logical framework, which earmarked certain groups based on precon-ceived biases and was incorporated into an all-encompassing drive topurify the socio-national body . Any potential restraint on the extermi-natory campaign against the Ukrainian nationalists was neutralized byan appeal to higher loyalties. Brutalities were committed as the ultimateexpression of loyalty to the socialist drive and its administrative embodi-ments: the Communist Party and the Soviet Ukrainian nation.
In this light, the very existence of the Ukrainian nationalists was a
violation of the natural order, and hence no mitigating circumstancescould be allowed in assessing their crimes. Nor would utilitarian con-siderations play a role in the ﬁght against them. They would have to beexcised from the Soviet Ukrainian body . Soviet intelligence reports revealthat the Soviets were aware of the nationalists’ clashes with theGermans. Knowledge, however, did not imply recognition. Notably , thereports carefully emphasized that the shift in the nationalists’ policyresulted not from a change of heart or convictions but merely from dis-appointment at their treatment by the Germans. For the Soviets, thevery existence of the nationalists was the bone of contention, not theirtactics or alliances.
The total alienation of the nationalist cause was captured in a color-
ful passage by Dmitrii Medvedev , a partisan leader-turned-writer. Refer-260 AMIR WEINER
19Milovan Djilas, Wartime (New York, 1977), 164–5; and Djilas, “Christ and the 
Commissar,” in George Urban, ed., Stalinism: Its Impact on Russia and the W orld 
(London, 1982), 203–8.
20Djilas, “Christ and the Commissar,” 207.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ring to his own contacts with the nationalist leader “Bul’ba” (Borovets)
and his entourage, Medvedev explained the national and linguisticalienation of the latter:
The speech of the “hetman” was incomprehensible, a barbarian mixture
of Ukrainian and German words. It was a language, as we later realized,broadly used by those Ukrainian nationalists brought up in the pubs ofBerlin and in the taverns of Ottawa and Chicago, persons without a pass-port, without a homeland, subjects of the international black market,rascals, ready to sell themselves to the Gestapo or the Intelligence Serviceor the Federal Bureau of Investigation or any other bourgeois espionageorganization.
National ostracization was augmented by a touch of class alienation.
“Whereas the [Bul’ba] wore a zaporozhtsa [a Ukrainian national shirt],
the [others] preferred a European suit, a colorful tie and manicured ﬁngernails, which were considered a sign of special reﬁnement amongthe bandits,” noted Medvedev .
21
The nationalists were de-individualized, portrayed as an undifferen-
tiated collective, detached from any speciﬁc domestic intimate environ-ment, and often referred to as animals. Killing them was not to involveany sense of guilt. Thus members of the Soviet polity should engage insystematic elimination of the “snake-like, slavish dogs of the Nazihangmen,” the “Ukrainian–German fascists” or the “agents of foreignintelligence services,” rather than mere “Ukrainian nationalists.” NikitaKhrushchev told a plenum of the Central Committee, “They [theUkrainian nationalists] killed themselves trying to please their master –Hitler, and to get only a small portion of the loot for their doggishservice. The German invaders shed the blood of Soviet Ukraine, shothundreds of thousands of Soviet people – women, the elderly and children. The Ukrainian–German Nationalists assisted and at present
[continue to] assist the Germans in these bloody crimes, fulﬁlling therole of hangmen.
22To make things worse, while the German compo-
nent of the evil duo was beaten and driven out of the homeland, itsUkrainian counterpart continued the destructive mission. The efforts tosabotage the restoration of the economy were seen as the fulﬁllment ofGerman instructions. Hence the internal enemy remained foreign evenwhen its foreign ally invader was expelled from Soviet territory . Thenationalists’ efforts to disassociate themselves from their alliance withthe Germans were dismissed by Khrushchev as a play in the face ofinevitable defeat.NATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 261
21Dmitrii Medvedev , Sil’nye Dukhom (Moscow, 1951), 84, 86.
22TsDAHOU, f. 1, op. 1, d. 664, ll. 262–3.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
On the battleﬁeld, therefore, the campaign against the nationalists
was deliberately launched as a war without prisoners. Between Febru-ary 1944 and May 1946, 110,825 nationalists were killed within a ter-ritory inhabited by less than 9 million ethnic Ukrainians. NKVD reportson individual clashes with nationalist detachments repeatedly failed tomention prisoners taken alive, emphasizing almost total annihilation.Deportations reached their climax between 1939 and 1953, when some570,826 people were deported from Ukraine without permission toreturn. A close look at the deportation ﬁgures, however, highlights theexterminatory character of the anti-nationalism campaign in the ﬁeld.Between February 1944 and January 1946, the NKVD claimed to havedetained 110,785 bandits (50,058 were convicted), but only 8,370people were arrested as members of the Organization of UkrainianNationalists and 15,959 as active insurgents. The 182,543 nationalistsdeported from the seven western regions between 1944 and 1952included family members of OUN or the Ukrainian Insurgent Army(UP A) and their supporters, non-adults, and families of those killed inclashes. Simply put, most of the active nationalist guerrillas were killedon the battleﬁeld. On the battleﬁeld, “We did not take prisoners as a rule.If we did take prisoners, we shot them after a preliminary interroga-tion,” a commissar of a partisan detachment casually told members of the Commission for the Compilation of the Chronicles of the GreatPatriotic War.
23
Accordingly , the execution of captured nationalist guerrillas became
a didactic public spectacle, with party ofﬁcials presiding over summarytrials and hangings in the village square. Quite likely , the ritual ofhanging, which had already been practiced against convicted collabo-rators, was intended to add an element of humiliation and terror, sincethe Soviet Criminal Code spoke only of shooting ( rasstrel ) as the ex-
ceptional measure of punishment for extremely serious crimes. Onceagain, a comparison with other countries is telling. Estimates for theNetherlands were three or four deaths on the occasion of arrests andforty deaths in the internment camps caused by resistance membersacting as guards. In the signiﬁcantly more violent Belgium, there wereabout forty extra-judicial executions. In the USSR, public executions ofalleged collaborators with the Germans were something to brag aboutwhen party ofﬁcials recounted their recent experience in the partisans’ranks. The Special Department of the Lenin Mounted Brigade, whichoperated for a short time in the Vinnytsia region, was reported to haveexecuted, often in public, no fewer than 825 collaborators. If the ﬁguresprovided by the brigade’s leaders are taken at face value, then the262 AMIR WEINER
23Institut Istorii Rossii, Otdel rukopisnykh fondov , f. 2, op. 9, d. 3, l. 5.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
number of people executed by a single partisan brigade, not necessarily
the largest one and operating within a rather small region in Ukraine,amounted to 13.7 percent of the total number of summary executionsbefore and during the liberation of France, and 233 percent of those inBelgium. Finally , violence was exercised primarily for political ratherthan military reasons. Soviet authorities made extensive use of theDestruction Battalions ( istrebitel’nye bataliony ) – auxiliary detachments
of armed civilians charged with hunting down German and nationaliststragglers – while professing their negligible military value in the pre-1939 Soviet territories. The value of these formations, noted the deputyhead of the Ukrainian NKVD, was the radicalization and proliferation ofviolence among the population at large, a key consideration in the SovietManichean worldview .
As summary executions of presumed collaborators proliferated in 
the initial stage of liberation, the returning Soviet powers moved quickly to curtail them. Immediately upon liberation, Red Army ofﬁcerswere said to prosecute, and in some cases execute, partisans whoexacted arbitrary revenge after the liberation. Random retributions,which often bordered on anarchy , were not merely a threat to stateauthority; for the latter, revenge was not necessarily the main moti-vation. The exercise of retribution only by Soviet authorities integratedit into the overall puriﬁcation drive, which by now engulfed every layerof the polity . The return of the regime as the sole arbiter and executorof revenge meant that the purge would be conducted along lines thatcould hardly be imagined in a random, popularly initiated purge. Extra-judicial justice operated as a cathartic moment, after which exhaustion,the desire to forget the imperfect past, and the impulse to reinstate acertain equilibrium would combine to extinguish the ﬂames of arbitraryacts. This, however, was not to happen. The transfer of the prosecutionof alleged wartime collaborators and bystanders to the jurisdiction ofthe NKVD Military Tribunals signaled that purges would become a per-manent component in the political and social life of the liberatedregions.
The irreversibility of any form of collaboration was further under-
lined by the absolute denial of political or social rehabilitation, evengiven the dire need for experienced personnel, a policy that set the SovietUnion further apart from other European countries that had been occu-pied by the Germans. In France, the willingness of large segments of thepopulation to accept certain acts of collaboration as legitimate, albeitundesirable, acts of survival was taken by the authorities as a mandatefor mass amnesty . In the Soviet Union, by contrast, the presence ofsimilar sentiments worked to solidify the regime’s resolve to excise col-laborators, regardless of circumstances and the need for their services.NATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 263
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
And unlike France, there was no political or social redemption for people
known to have served under the occupation authorities. There, notedSoviet commentators, the replenishment of the state and military appa-ratus with former Vichyites amounted to a conscious blurring of the distinction between victims and victimizers. Nor could the stain of col-laboration be removed by postwar performance. Soviet authorities con-tinued to exact revenge on those suspected of collaboration down to thebottom of the social ladder. Professional and bureaucratic skills countedfor nothing even in the face of severe shortages. Time and again, suc-cessful rural experts and kolkhozniki were denied governmental awards
based on their spotty wartime records. Tellingly , crimes appeared as abiological trait when the deﬁnition of irredeemable sins was extended toinclude blood relatives of collaborators. Scores of individuals weredenied awards merely for being related to people who served as police-men or in the Vlasov army . Sons, after all, could be responsible for theirfathers.
Along with the revival of capital punishment for political crimes, the
irredeemability of the Ukrainian nationalists was codiﬁed on April 6,1950, by order of the Council of Ministers of the USSR. This directivereplaced shorter deportation terms for those exiled from Ukrainebetween 1944 and 1949 with permanent exile ( navechno ), most notably
the 182,543 members and supporters of the OUN-UP A and their fami-lies. By 1950, Ukrainian nationalists appeared beyond hope, and theirexclusion from the Ukrainian body national was meant to be perma-nent. Accordingly , families of both arrested and slain nationalistactivists were deported. The death of the latter was not necessarilyredemptive.
Puriﬁcation continued relentlessly . As European legislators were
feverishly passing amnesty laws for convicted wartime collaborators, inthe Soviet Union the search for and prosecution of alleged collaboratorsintensiﬁed. Between September 20 and October 10, 1947, alone, 326people were arrested in the eastern regions of Ukraine on charges of col-laboration with the German occupation authorities, making them thesingle largest group of the 668 people charged with “anti-Soviet activ-ity .” The 1955 amnesty decree of wartime collaborators excluded thoseconvicted of murder and torture of Soviet citizens, a rather fatal excep-tion. Whereas by 1958 in France, all those convicted of participating inthe massacre at Oradour-sur-Glane, the single largest wartime massacreof a non-Jewish population, were released from prison, the Soviet regimecontinued to prosecute and execute similar cases well into the 1980s.As late as December 1984, military tribunals sentenced to death indi-viduals guilty of killing Soviet POWs, activists, Jews, and communistpartisans.264 AMIR WEINER
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Nor did the post-Stalin amnesty signal rehabilitation. Individuals
associated with nationalist forces in Ukraine were released from thecamps in early 1954, but it was only in mid-1991, with the loomingdemise of the Soviet system, that they were granted complete rehabili-tation, on the grounds that “their hands were not stained with blood.”The same logic was applied to the national arena, where the decayingregime mobilized all its resources in a vain effort to block the rehabili-tation of OUN-UP A in western Ukraine. Damning information from theKGB archives about UP A atrocities was circulated in press conferencesand published in the popular press. Graphic data on massacres of peace-ful citizens, ethnic Poles, and Soviet activists, and the close collaborationwith the Nazis, were used to underline the essence of the nationalistmovement as alien to the national body . In response to pleas by the L’viv regional party committee secretary , the Central Committee inMoscow addressed the issue in a speciﬁc decree. The Central Committeewent out of its way to prevent the “justiﬁcation of the crimes of the OUN bands under the guise of criticism of Stalinism.” To counter therehabilitation efforts by a variety of opposition groups in westernUkraine, it ordered the release of archival documentaries on the nation-alist atrocities during and after the war, arranged for young people tomeet victims of the nationalists, and organized a scholarly conferenceon the “anti-people” deeds of the OUN-UP A. With the approach of theﬁftieth anniversary of the Great Patriotic War, the treacherous nation-alists were to be exposed. As long as the Myth of the War was the pillarof the polity’s legitimacy , the excision of the nationalist cause was non-negotiable.
It comes as no surprise that the totalization of Soviet practices in the
quest for purity brought to the fore the inherent tension between thebiological and the sociological categorization of the enemy within, andconsequently the inevitable comparison to Nazi Germany , the othertotalitarian enterprise. Nowhere else was this issue exposed more clearlythan in the Soviet policy toward its Jewish minority . In the wake of thewar and the trauma of the Holocaust, conducted extensively on Sovietsoil with the implicit and often explicit approval of the local populace,as well as a wave of popular and ofﬁcial anti-Semitism that swept theimmediate postwar era, ordinary Jewish citizens and activists began to ponder the unthinkable: was there a logical afﬁnity between the twoideologies? Already in the summer of 1944, a group of disgruntled,demobilized Jewish servicemen protested in a letter to Stalin that theUkrainian Communist Party had “a lot in common with the course thatoriginated earlier from the chancery of Goebbels, whose worthy trans-mitters turned out in the Central Committee and the Council of People’sNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 265
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Commissars of Ukraine .”24This point was also laid out bluntly by Vasilii
Grossman in his epic Life and Fate , which he started writing at this 
time. Grossman chose none other than the triumphant moment and site of Stalingrad to underline the common ethos of the Nazi and Sovietenterprises:
Suddenly , probably because of the war, he began to doubt whether there
really was such a gulf between the legitimate Soviet question about socialorigin and the bloody , fateful question of nationality as posed by theGermans ...T o  m e ,  a  distinction based on social origin seems legitimate
and moral. One thing I am certain of: it’s terrible to kill someone simplybecause he’s a Jew . They’re people like any others – good, bad, gifted,stupid, stolid, cheerful, kind, sensitive, greed y... Hitler says none of that
matters – all that matters is that they’re Jewish. And I protest with my whole being. But then we have the same principle: what matters iswhether or not you’re the son of an aristocrat, the son of a merchant, theson of a kulak; and whether you’re good-natured, wicked, gifted, kind,stupid, happy , is neither here nor there. And we’re not talking about themerchants, priests and aristocrats themselves – but about their childrenand grandchildren. Does noble blood run in one’s veins like Jewishness?Is one a priest or a merchant by heredity?
25
Indeed, in the wake of the war, Soviet public representations increas-
ingly identiﬁed Jews as inherently resistant to Soviet acculturation and, even more threateningly , as an undifferentiated entity . As early asDecember 1941, during a conversation with a visiting Polish delegation,Stalin found time to reﬂect on the martial qualities of the warring sides.The Slavs, observed the Soviet leader, are “the ﬁnest and bravest of allairmen. They react very quickly , for they are a young race which hasn’tyet been worn out . . . The Germans are strong, but the Slavs will defeat
them.” Jews, on the other hand, were repeatedly referred to as “poor androtten soldiers.”
26
A core message of the anti-cosmopolitan campaign in the late 1940s
was that the Jew remained a Jew, an eternal alien to the body national,no matter what the circumstances. As such, he had to be stripped of thefalse layers within which he deceptively wrapped himself. In early 1949,the Soviet press violated one of the taboos of Bolshevik revolutionaryculture when it started disclosing pseudonyms. The birth names ofassimilated Jewish ﬁgures in the arts were regularly attached to their266 AMIR WEINER
24TsDAHOU, f. 1, op. 23, d. 2366, l. 25.
25Vasilii Grossman, Zhizn’ i sud’ba (Moscow, 1988), 542–3.
26Stanislaw Kot, Conversations with the Kremlin and Dispatches from Russia (Oxford,
1963), 153.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
assumed ones. And so the literary critic Ilia Isaakovich Stebun learned,
along with the readers of the republic’s main newspaper, that at the endof the day , after honorable service at the front and a career of writingin the Ukrainian language, he was still Katsenelson. Similarly , the poetLazar Samilovich Sanov found out that his own work in the Ukrainianlanguage and service as a war correspondent did not change the factthat he was still Smulson, just as Zhadanov was still Livshits and Ganremained Kagan.
When the anti-Semitic campaign was reaching its climax in early
1953, the alleged Jewish resistance to Soviet acculturation called foruncompromising methods by the authorities. While exposing anaccused Jewish embezzler in the small town of Zhmerynka who, need-less to say , had managed to avoid the front during the Great PatrioticWar (“he fell ill precisely at the end of June 1941”), the satirical maga-zine Krokodil posed a rhetorical question: “To tell you the truth, we
became tired of reading your decisions scattered there: ‘to reprimand,to point out, to suggest,’ etc. Doesn’t it seem to you, comrades, that you
overestimate the educational signiﬁcance of these resolutions of yours? And,anyway, who are you trying to reeducate? With such touching forbearance,too? ”
27The Jew, simply put, proved to be the anomaly in the Marxist
premise of the primacy of nurture over nature. He was immune to reed-ucation. In early 1953, with the recent executions of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee leadership, the unfolding Doctors’ Plot, and rumorsabout the inevitable mass deportation of Jews dominating the day , therecommendation to transfer the case to the regional prosecutor (anofﬁce famed for meting out swift and harsh punishments) sent the un-equivocal message that there was only one way to deal with such types.As the living antithesis to the core Soviet myths of hard and honestsocialist labor and the martyrdom of the recent war, the Jew was beyondredemption. His nature was immune even to the powerful acculturationof nearly four decades of Soviet life.
Uncovering the real Jew, however, was not conﬁned to the Stalin era.
Several years later, it was the turn of the de-Stalinizing Khrushchev to warn other communists against false hopes of acculturating the Jew . While attending a session of the Central Committee of the PolishCommunist Party , Khrushchev urged the Poles to correct the “abnor-mal composition of the leading cadres” as the Soviets successfully haddone. Staring hard at the chairman of the meeting, Roman Zambrowski,who was born Zukerman, Khrushchev exclaimed: “Yes, you have manyleaders with names ending in ‘ski,’ but an Abramovich remains anNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 267
27Vasilii Ardamatskii, “Pinia iz Zhmerinki,” Krokodil 8 (March 20, 1953): 13.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Abramovich. And you have too many Abramoviches in your leading
cadres.”28Sometime later, while reﬂecting on the evident failure of the
Jewish Autonomous Region of Birobidzhan to establish itself as anational homeland for Soviet Jewry , Khrushchev concluded that it wasthe result of historical conditions. Yet his description of the sociologicalwas practically biological. “They [the Jews] do not like collective work,group discipline. They have always preferred to be dispersed. They areindividualists,” Khrushchev told Le ﬁgaro in an interview in March
1958. Finally , in the crudest ofﬁcially ordained anti-Semitic publicationto emerge from the Soviet system, Trohym Kychko’s Iudaizm bez prikras ,
Nazi-like vocabulary and illustrations drove home the message of alien-ation of everything distinctively Jewish from the tradition of progressivehumanity in general, the Soviet family in particular, and even morespeciﬁcally , from the Ukrainian nation. Portrayed as speculators andhostile to manual labor, collaborators with the Nazis, and murderers of Symon Petliura, Jews were entirely excluded from the October Revolution, the Great Patriotic War, and Ukrainian aspirations for independence – all subjects of core myths within the Soviet milieu.
But this complete exclusion concealed a crucial difference between
the Nazi and Soviet enterprises. The class-based Soviet theory and prac-tices of structuring society seemed to present an ominous obstacle to theapplication of uniform social targeting. Classes, strata, and layers wereneither faceless nor homogeneous. Rather, they were variegated andarranged in a hierarchical order based on the services their membershad rendered to the communist drive. Responsibility and accountabilitywere assessed on the individual’s merit, even though this principle wasoften compromised in the course of exercising the structuring acts.Maxim Gorky was not off the mark when he stated in his celebratoryvolume of the construction of the White Sea Canal that “the dicta-torship of the proletariat has once more earned the right to declare: ‘I do not ﬁght to kill as does the bourgeoisie: I ﬁght to resurrect toil-ing humanity to a new life. I kill only when it is not possible to eradicate the ancient habit of feeding on human ﬂesh and blood.’ ”
29
Moreover, individuals maintained the right to appeal and often did sosuccessfully . No one could articulate this principle better than Stalin,and for good reason. In a series of speeches delivered as the Terrorapproached its climax, Stalin explained its guidelines. Concluding hisremarks to the plenary session of the Central Committee on March 5,1937, Stalin warned the delegates not to confuse sworn and irre-deemable enemies with those who recanted and redeemed themselves268 AMIR WEINER
28Joseph B. Schechtman, Star in Eclipse (New York, 1961), 81.
29Belomor , 338.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
when they joined forces with the Bolsheviks in the anti-Trotskyite 
campaign or those “who, at one point happened to be walking along the street where this or that Trotskyite happened to be walking, too.”“In this question, as in all other questions, an individual , differentiated
approach is required. We must not treat all alike,” concluded Stalin.
30
Three months later in a speech before the Military Council of the
Defense Ministry on June 2, 1937, in the wake of the liquidation ofthe military leadership, Stalin reﬂected on the tension arising from theSoviet search for the enemy within. Reminding his audience of Lenin’snoble and Friedrich Engels’s bourgeois origins on the one hand, and ofthe proletarian origins of Leonid Serebriakov and Iakov Livshits (formerCentral Committee Secretary and Deputy People’s Commissar ofCommunications, respectively) who turned out to be bad apples on theother, Stalin concluded:
Not every person of a given class is capable of doing harm. Individual
people among the nobles and the bourgeoisie worked for the working classand not badly . Out of a stratum such as the lawyers came many revolu-tionaries. Marx was the son of a lawyer, not a son of a batrak [agricultural
laborer] or of a worker. Among these strata can always be found peoplewho can serve the cause of the working class, no worse, [but] ratherbetter, than pure-blooded proletarians. That is why the general standard,that this is not a batrak ’s son, is an outdated one, not applicable to indi-
vidual people. This is not a Marxist approac h...T his, I would say, is a bio-
logical approach, not a Marxist. W e consider Marxism not a biological science,but a sociological science. Hence this general standard is absolutely correct withregard to estates, groups, strata, [but] it is not applicable to every individualwho is not of proletarian or peasant origins .
31
Indeed, the Soviets persistently rejected the primacy of the biological
over the sociological. The principle of human heredity and its potentialpractices, whether exterminatory euthanasia or constructive eugenics,were ofﬁcially repudiated in the Soviet Union from the early 1930s on.What is more, the Soviet Union was practically alone among the majorcountries in the 1930s in its rejection of euthanasia or sterilization ofthe mentally retarded, a practice that was embraced, often enthusiasti-cally , on both sides of the Atlantic. In such an atmosphere, Nobel Prize-winning doctor Alexis Carrel could call on modern societies to do awaywith the mentally retarded and criminals who cost a fortune to main-tain in asylums and prisons. “Why do we preserve these useless andNATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 269
30“Zakliuchitel’noe slovo tovarishcha Stalina na plenume TsK VKP (b) 5 marta 1937
g.,” Bol’shevik 7 (1937): 19.
31“Rech’ I. V . Stalina v Narkomate oborony , 2 iiunia 1937 g.,” Istochnik 3 (1994): 73–4,
italics added.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
harmful beings? Why should society not dispose of the criminals and the
insane in a more economical manner?” asked Carrel. The worst crimi-nals (including the insane and people who misled the public in impor-tant matters), he concluded, “should be humanely and economicallydisposed of in small euthanasic institutions supplied with proper gases. . . Modern society should not hesitate to organize itself with referenceto the normal individual. Philosophical systems and sentimental pre-judices must give way before such a necessity .”
32In Nazi Germany , 
as several scholars have recently reminded us, euthanasia was a keyelement in ideology and practice, and the forerunner of the persecutionof the Jews, gypsies, and homosexuals, in sharp contrast to the Sovietpuriﬁcation drive, which at no point was anchored in genocidal ideol-ogy . Without it, the operation of industrialized killing – the aspect thatset the Holocaust apart from other genocides – was inconceivable.
The same logic applied to eugenics, the constructive twin of eutha-
nasia. In his 1935 Out of the Night: A Biologist’s View of the Future ,
Hermann Muller, the chief advocate of eugenics in the Soviet Union,argued that with artiﬁcial insemination technology , “in the course of apaltry century or tw o...i t  w ould be possible for the majority of the pop-
ulation to become of the innate quality of such men as Lenin, Newton,Leonardo, Pasteur, Beethoven, Omar Khayyam, Pushkin, Sun Yat Sen,Marx . . . or even to possess their varied faculties combined ...w hich
would offset the American prospects of a maximum number of BillySundays, Valentinos, Jack Dempseys, Babe Ruths, even Al Capones.”
33
But when Muller forwarded a copy of his book to Stalin in May 1936and assured him that “it is quite possible, by means of the technique ofartiﬁcial insemination which has been developed in this country , to usefor such purposes the reproductive material of the most transcendentlysuperior individuals, of the one in 50,000, or one in 100,000, since thistechnique makes possible a multiplication of more than 50,000 times,”he practically sealed his fate and the fate of eugenics in the Soviet Unionfor the next three decades. Stalin read the book, and although he did not respond in writing or verbally until June 1937, his actions spoke forthemselves. Muller escaped the Soviet Union by the skin of his teeth, buthis cohort was shot to a man. The Institute of Medical Genetics was dis-banded, and the era of Lysenkoism and its doctrine of acquired charac-teristics was ushered in. In the long process of constructing a socialistsociety , acculturation prevailed over biology as the means of both theexpansion and puriﬁcation of the polity .270 AMIR WEINER
32Alexis Carell, Man, the Unknown (London, 1935), 318–19.
33Mark B. Adams, “Eugenics in Russia, 1900–1940,” in Adams, ed., The W ellborn
Science: Eugenics in Germany, France, Brazil, and Russia (New York, 1990), 194–5.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
And indeed, there was not, nor could there be, a highly placed Jew
such as Lazar Kaganovich in the Nazi leadership; nearly half a millionJews could neither serve in the Wehrmacht nor become members ofthe National Socialist Party . It did not matter if they had excelled in theranks of the German army in the Great War. There was one Jew, and hecould not be Naziﬁed. The Jew was an enemy not because of a role heplayed or a position he represented. He was evil incarnate, irredeemable,and unreconstructed, and as such, had to be exterminated. The basis onwhich the extermination of the Jewish “lice” took place was neither thatof religion nor law but the racial biopolitics of genetic heredity . That wasnot the case in the Soviet Union. True, enacting the motto “sons are notresponsible for their fathers” proved difﬁcult. Just two years after Stalin’sfamous dictum, NKVD and party investigators were busily plunging into the records of members of the Communist Party , resurrecting fromoblivion the original sin of the wrong social origin to destroy scores oftrue believers and their families. In the wake of the Terror, it appearedas if the stain of bad social origin was unremovable and incurable. Ittook the war to realize and institutionalize Stalin’s dictum in Sovietpolitical life. Nevertheless, even at the height of the ofﬁcially endorsedanti-Semitic campaign, there were hundreds of thousands of Jews in the ranks of the party , the army , and scores of other political institu-tions. Restrictions on the number of Jews in state institutions ( numerus
clausus ) could and did coexist side by side with Jewish high ofﬁcers,
Heroes of the Soviet Union, and party activists. The Nazi antithesis was still a powerful deterrent, especially regarding the Jews. The UnitedNations draft resolution of the Genocide Convention on November 21,1947, provided the Soviets with the opportunity to elaborate their owndeﬁnition of excisionary and exterminatory ideologies and practices. In his comments on the treaty , Aron Trainin, then the leading Sovietauthority in international law, agreed with the prevailing notion ofgenocide as extermination of national or racial collectives. His points of disagreement, however, were telling. First, argued Trainin, how-ever extreme the persecution of political opponents based on politicalmotives may be, it does not constitute genocide. Second, the deﬁnitionof genocide should not be conﬁned to physical extermination but appliedto the curtailment of collective national-cultural rights as well. “Ofcourse, in the land of the Soviets, where the Leninist–Stalinist nationalpolitics triumphs and the cooperation of nations is a political reality ,there is no problem of national rights and national minorities,” wroteTrainin. It was, however, the case in the capitalist world, where classexploitation could be identiﬁed with national oppression. Not only lynchtrials but also a dense net of national-cultural barriers separate Negroesin the United States from the white population, Trainin continued.NATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 271
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Accordingly , international law should struggle against both lynch trials,
as tools of physical extermination of Negroes, and the politics of nationalcultural oppression. Therefore, along with physical and biological genocide, the notion of national-cultural genocide must be advanced, agenocide that sets for itself the goal of undermining the existence and development of national and racial groups.
34
In essence, these were the twin pillars of Soviet population policies: 
the application of state violence anchored in political rationale and the simultaneous cultivation of ethno-national particularism. Withoutthem, one could hardly understand the simultaneous eradication ofentire national elites and intelligentsias along with the persistent de-lineation of particularistic identities. In this light, total excision in theSoviet polity was not necessarily exterminatory , nor did it operate by a racial-biological code. And this, in turn, shifts the focus of our dis-cussion to another political arena within which the Soviet socio-ethnicbody was delineated, that of commemorative politics of cataclysmicevents. . . .
Reﬂecting on the horriﬁc slaughter consuming Europe at the time,
Sigmund Freud observed in April 1915 that war was merely an instru-ment that stripped away illusions and layers of civility , “laying bare theprimal man in each of us.” The key , then, to the total barbarization ofwarfare lay not with the states but with the community and its indi-vidual components, which “no longer raise objections ...t o  t h e  s u p -
pression of evil passions, and men perpetrate deeds of cruelty , fraud,treachery and barbarity so incompatible with their level of civilizationthat one would have thought them impossible.”
35One could hardly 
deny the brutalization of public life triggered by the cataclysmic experi-ence of the Great War, or any other mass, violent conﬂict for that matter.Categorization and treatment of enemies as undifferentiated, unre-formable, irredeemable, and hence exterminable appear as a logical con-sequence from which even Marxist regimes, armed with a sociologicalparadigm premised on differentiation, reform, and redemption, couldnot escape.
Nor were the origins and technologies of Soviet violence divorced
from those of other modern “gardening states.” The refusal of the Sovietparty-state to recognize any self-imposed restrictions on its aspirations272 AMIR WEINER
34Aron Naumovich Trainin, “Bor’ba s genotsidom kak mezhdunarodnym prestuple-
niem,” Sovetskoe gosudarstvo i pravo 5 (May 1948): 4, 6.
35Sigmund Freud, “Thoughts for the Times on War and Death,” in James Strachey , ed.,
The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological W orks of Sigmund Freud (London, 1957),
14: 275–300. Here, 280, 299.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and practices certainly set it apart from liberal democracies. Yet this very
refusal was rooted in the modern secular state’s assumption of respon-sibility for the spiritual, social, and physical well-being of its subjects.With the diminishing power of divine doctrines and their institutionalincarnations, such as the Catholic church in the pre-modern era, which had often contained its violent schemes, the modern state wasrestrained by and accountable to none in its drive to remold society andindividuals.
Yet the endurance of Marxist state violence and its constant acceler-
ation in peacetime pointed to an additional source. As communistregimes shifted gears in their pursuit of homogenized and harmonioussocieties, their belief in the malleability of human nature seemed towane. In the Soviet Union, those marked by the party-state as internalenemies after the establishment of socialism were deemed irreducible,unreformable, and irredeemable elements; and in the heyday of the Cultural Revolution in China, the “blood pedigree theory” was prac-ticed under the slogan: “If the father’s a hero, the son’s a good chap; Ifthe father’s a reactionary , the son’s a bad egg.” Did nurture ﬁnallysuccumb to nature? Not necessarily . Excision, even when totalized, didnot emanate from a genocidal ideology and was not practiced throughexterminatory institutions. Hence communists repeatedly turned theirattention to groups and individuals they had already engaged previ-ously , an inconceivable practice had these entities been stigmatized apriori as racially or biologically unﬁt. Puriﬁcation did not engage col-lectives as such but rather the individuals who comprised them. As the ticking of the Soviet eschatological clock grew louder, they bore thebrunt of an increasingly urgent quest for purity .
Further Reading: Soviet Nationality Policy
Peter Blitstein, “Nation-building or Russiﬁcation? Obligatory Russian instruc-
tion in the Soviet non-Russian School, 1938–1953,” in Ronald Grigor Sunyand Terry Martin, eds., A State of Nations: Empire and Nation-making in the Age
of Lenin and Stalin (New York, 2001).
Rogers Brubaker, “Nationhood and the National Question in the Soviet Union
and Post-Soviet Eurasia,” Theory and Society , vol. 23, no. 1 (1994).
Francine Hirsch, “Toward an Empire of Nations: Border-Making and the 
Formation of Soviet National Identities,” The Russian Review , vol. 59, no. 2
(2000).
Adeeb Khalid, The Politics of Muslim Cultural Reform: Jadidism in Central Asia
(Berkeley , 1998).
Terry Martin, The Afﬁrmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet
Union, 1923–1939 (Ithaca, 2001).NATURE AND NURTURE IN A SOCIALIST UTOPIA 273
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Paula Michaels, “Medical Propaganda and Cultural Revolution in Soviet 
Kazakhstan, 1928–1941,” The Russian Review , vol. 59, no. 2 (2000).
Douglas Northrop, “Languages of Loyalty: Gender, Politics, and Party 
Supervision in Uzbekistan, 1927–1941,” The Russian Review , vol. 59, no. 2
(2000).
Matt Payne, “Forge of the Kazakh Proletariat? The Turksib, Nativization, 
and Industrialization during Stalins’s First Five-Year Plan,” in Suny andMartin, eds.
Yuri Slezkine, “The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State
Promoted Ethnic Particularism,” Slavic Review , vol. 53, no. 3 (1994).
Ronald Grigor Suny , The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution, and the Col-
lapse of the Soviet Union (Stanford, 1993).274 AMIR WEINER
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The Postwar Years
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
11
Russia after the War: Hopes,
Illusions, and Disappointments
Elena Zubkova
Excerpted from Russia after the War: Hopes, Illusions, and
Disappointments, 1945–1957 , trans. and ed. by Hugh Ragsdale
(Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1998).
Editor’s Introduction
The Second World War affected far more than just Stalinist policy toward
ethnic and national minorities. It touched the lives of all Soviet citizens,usually in very tragic ways. Some 27 million people in the Soviet Uniondied as a result of the war.
1Virtually every family in the country lost at
least one close relative. Entire cities and towns were destroyed, leavingmillions of people homeless. The scale of death and destruction was duein part to huge territorial losses at the beginning of the war coupled withbrutal Nazi occupation policies. When Hitler invaded the Soviet Union inJune 1941, he took Stalin by surprise, and the German army drove all the way to the outskirts of Moscow in a matter of months. Only afterthe decisive victory at Stalingrad in 1942–3 was the Soviet army able, attremendous cost, to begin expelling the Nazis from the country.The Nazisemployed a scorched earth strategy as they retreated, burning crops anddemolishing cities.
In addition to causing widespread death and destruction, the war
reshaped the Soviet Union in fundamental ways. Soviet citizens’ lives andmentalities were entirely transformed by the war. Millions of people vol-unteered for or were drafted into the military, and those who survivedto the end of the war marched through eastern Europe all the way toBerlin. On the homefront, millions of women took over factory jobs andcollective farm positions vacated by men who had joined the army. Huge
1As discussed in Zubkova’s selection below, historians still debate the total number of
Soviet casualties during the war.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
numbers of people and entire factories from the western part of the
country were evacuated to cities in the Urals, Siberia, and Central Asia.Victory in the war required enormous resourcefulness and sacriﬁce onthe part of soldiers, partisans, and civilians, and at the end of the warmany people had developed a new-found sense of initiative and entitle-ment. But most of all, victory in the war raised to unprecedented heightsthe power and prestige of Stalin and the Stalinist system.
Despite the importance of the war, historians are only now beginning
to study its effect on Soviet society and on the Stalinist system more generally. In addition to Weiner’s pioneering work, Elena Zubkova’s bookRussia after the War makes a major contribution to our understanding of
Soviet society in the postwar years. In the excerpt below, Zubkovadescribes the impact of the war, not only regarding the death and destruc-tion it caused, but in terms of its lasting psychological effect on Soviet cit-izens. As such a cataclysmic event, the war could not but shape people’sthinking and perceptions for years to come.The war thus inﬂuenced polit-ical and social developments for the remainder of the Stalin era (up to hisdeath in 1953) and even beyond.
Zubkova begins by analyzing the demographic and social implications
of wartime casualties. Because three-quarters of the nearly 27 millionkilled in the war were men, a severe gender imbalance emerged in thepostwar years. Especially among young adults, women far outnumberedmen, so many women had little prospect of getting married, or of remar-rying if they had lost their husbands in the war. Some unmarried womenhad children anyway, though these children grew up without fathers. Ofcourse many children lost fathers during the war, or were orphaned alto-gether. Moreover, children and teenagers often suffered long-term healthproblems as a result of malnourishment, disease, and overwork duringthe war.
Zubkova attaches special signiﬁcance to the place of veterans in
postwar society. A total of 8.5 million men had been demobilized fromthe Red Army by 1948, and these veterans had difﬁculty adjusting to civil-ian life. Compounding their readjustment problems was the fact that manyof them could not ﬁnd employment or worked in jobs for which they hadno training. T wo million veterans were left with permanent disabilities asa result of wartime injuries and could not work at all.Those veterans whoreturned home to areas formerly under Nazi occupation often lacked adequate housing as their homes had been destroyed in the war.Veterans, then, made up an important new social group which enjoyedsubstantial prestige but also faced enormous obstacles in postwar life.
Zubkova asks whether these veterans constituted a potential force for
political change after the war. She makes an analogy with veterans of theWar of 1812 who, having defeated Napoleon and marched all the way to278 ELENA ZUBKOVA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Paris, later revolted against the tsarist autocracy and demanded a consti-
tution. Soviet veterans of the Second World War also derived a sense ofprerogative from their victory, and they too had their horizons expandedby ﬁghting abroad.The fact that they maintained informal networks amongthemselves seemed to offer the chance to organize for political change.More generally some veterans and civilians hoped that Stalin and hisregime would reward them for their great sacriﬁces in the war by grant-ing some sort of political liberalization. But such liberalization was notforthcoming – on the contrary, the Stalinist regime became more rigidand repressive than ever.
Zubkova explains that several countervailing factors precluded de-
mands for political change. First, the wartime victory elevated Stalin’sprestige and seemed to vindicate all aspects of the Stalinist system.Despite the enormous human costs of collectivization, rapid industrial-ization, and the Great T error, even these policies could be justiﬁed as nec-essary measures to prepare for war. Second, the war created a sense ofunity between the population and the Soviet government, so it was difﬁ-cult for people to break that unity by opposing the Stalinist regime in thepostwar era. Third, after years of ﬁghting, death, and destruction, theSoviet people above all wanted peace. Most of them were not preparedto engage in a struggle with their own government to force politicalchange.
The lack of a coherent political challenge to Stalinism did not mean
that all Soviet citizens were complacent. Workers evacuated during thewar to factories in Siberia voiced their sense of betrayal when, aftervictory, the government did not allow them to return to their homes.Other workers organized demonstrations to demand better living andworking conditions.The postwar economic situation was so impoverishedthat much of the population lived without basic items of food and cloth-ing. Hunger and suffering were widespread and people also feared a risein crime due to extreme shortages. But despite incredible hardship, nobroad-based challenge to Stalinist regime emerged. The Soviet peoplelearned to accept continued suffering, as they put aside their hopes for abetter life after the war.RUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 279
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Russia after the War: Hopes, Illusions,
and Disappointments
Elena Zubkova
The Victory and the Victors
The war naturally left a dreadful legacy across the country . An extraor-
dinary state commission, charged with calculating the material lossesresulting from combat operations and defense expenditures more gen-erally , assessed the cost at 2,569 billion rubles.
1This ﬁgure took into
account the destruction of cities and towns, industrial enterprises, andrailroad bridges; the loss of output of pig iron and steel; the contractionof the motor vehicle ﬂeet and the livestock population; and so on.Nowhere, however, was there mention of the number of lives lost (if weignore the ﬁgure of 7 million announced by Stalin in 1946).
The magnitude of human losses in the Soviet Union during the
Second World War is still disputed among historians. One reason for thedisagreement is the lack of a complete statistical base and authoritativeﬁgures on birth and death rates, the natural rate of growth of the popu-lation, and other demographic indicators.
2Research based on the
methodology of demographic balance3indicates total human losses in
the USSR during the war of 26.6 million people.4Approximately 76
This chapter was translated and edited by Hugh Ragsdale.
1B. N. Ponomarev , Istoriia SSSR s drevneishikh vremen do nashikh dnei , 11 vols. (Moscow,
1966–80), 11: 47. [As the ruble of the time was a controlled currency not traded inworld ﬁnancial markets, its real value is impossible to determine, and hence it hardlymakes sense to try to give an equivalent dollar value for the sum cited here. – H.R.]
2Not even the formerly secret information recently put at the disposal of historians on
the demographic composition of the population during and after the war has clariﬁedthe situation fully . The indices of the birth and death rates of the population held in dif-ferent ofﬁces of the government (for example, the Central Statistical Administration ofthe USSR and the Ministry of Health) often not only fail to coincide but contradict eachother. The most detailed examination of the problem is in V . P . Popov , “Prichinysokrashcheniia chislennosti naseleniia RSFSR posle Velikoi otechestvennoi voiny ,” Sotsiologicheskie issledovaniia , 1994, No. 10, 76–9.
3The human losses evaluated here to determine the demographic balance include: (a)
those dying as a consequence of the military or other action of the enemy; (b) those dyingas a result of the higher level of mortality during the war in the rear, in the regions abut-ting the front, and in the occupied territory; (c) those people from the population of theUSSR on 22 June 1941 who left the territory of the country during the war and did notreturn before its conclusion (not including POWs and displaced persons).
4E. M. Andreev et al., Naselenie Sovetskogo Soiuza, 1922–1991 gg. (Moscow, 1993), 73.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
percent, that is, about 20 million, were men, the greater part of whom
had been born between 1901 and 1931 – the most capable contingentof the male population.
5This circumstance alone suggests the serious-
ness of the demographic problems of postwar society . In 1940 the Sovietpopulation numbered 100.3 million females and 92.3 million males.The primary source of the imbalance was the superior life expectancy ofwomen, especially after age 60. In 1946 the Soviet population numbered96.2 million females and 74.4 million males; and in comparison with theprewar situation, the substantially greater number of women wasalready conspicuous in the age cohort of 20- to 44-year-olds. In 1940,there were 37.6 million women and 34.8 million men between the agesof 20 and 44, whereas in 1946 there were an equal number of womenand 10 million fewer men of the same age cohort.
6In the countryside the
situation was even worse. Whereas in 1940 the ratio of women to menon collective farms was approximately 1.1 : 1, in 1945 it was 2.7 : 1!
7
Women thus constituted the great majority of the postwar Soviet
population. This situation brought on serious problems, not only demo-graphic but psychological as well, eventuating in social pathology andthe lonely solitude of women. The postwar fatherlessness of so manychildren engendered a striking vogue of adolescent vagabondage andcrime. Nevertheless, all the losses and deprivations notwithstanding, itwas precisely the initiative of women that made postwar society so pro-liﬁc. Bereft of husbands, left without the hope of having a conventionalfamily , and in the most difﬁcult of material conditions, many womencontinued to bear children. In 1946, for example, 752,000 childrenwere born to unmarried mothers; in 1947, 747,000; in 1948,665,000; in 1949, 985,000; in 1950, 944,000; in 1951, 930,000; in1952, 849,000.
8
The children of wartime were a special problem, the least secure part
of the population. During the war, children suffered side by side withadults and sometimes more than adults. They died in bombing raids, ofhunger and disease, or they were forcibly deported abroad. The waryears depressed the birth rate of the population palpably . In 1946 therewere 53 million children below age 14 – 14 million fewer than in 1940.
9
Many teenagers had to go into industrial production during the war,both in order to take the place of adult workers leaving for the front andRUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 281
5Ibid., 77.
6Ibid., 121–34.
7Iu.V . Argutiunian, Sovetskoe krest ¢ianstvo v gody V elikoi otechestvennoi voiny (Moscow,
1963), 318.
8Popov , “Prichiny sokrashcheniia chislennosti naseleniia RSFSR posle Velikoi otechest-
vennoi voiny ,” 91.
9Andreev et al., Naselenie Sovetskogo Soiuza, 1922–1991 , 53, 70.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
in order to secure the means of subsistence for themselves and their fam-
ilies. Teenagers worked as if they were adults, sometimes ten to twelvehours a day . Stressful work and constant undernourishment unavoid-ably damaged the health of the younger generation.
In June 1945 the party Central Committee ordered an ofﬁcial inspec-
tion of the industrial enterprises of Gorkii Oblast (province) for thepurpose of evaluating teenagers’ working conditions and the state oftheir health. The commission’s conclusions were disturbing: “In themajority of the industries examined, normal living conditions forteenagers were not available, and these circumstances lead to sickli-ness and retardation of their physical development.”
10In the Molotov
Factory a medical examination of 1,070 teenagers was carried out. Itfound 379 (35 percent) of them clinically ill: sixty-four suffered fromdiseases of the digestive tract; ﬁfty-one, skin rashes and other dermato-logical disorders; six, tuberculosis; and four, muscular dystrophy . Of 670youths between ages 15 and 17, 340 (50.6 percent) suffered from aretardation of growth (height) of one to two years, and 413 (61.6percent) were underweight. The majority were anemic.
11
Psychologists observed that the children of wartime matured early –
that is, they developed an outlook on life more sophisticated than thatof their peers growing up in peaceful conditions. Such precocity exactedan inevitable psychological price. The child’s psyche suffered aggravatedtrauma from the loss of loved ones, the fear of death, and the dread of being orphaned. A whole generation of children grew up withoutfathers in Russia, children without a home in the full sense of the word.They grew up in a truncated family or without any family , in schools,kindergartens, or urban shelters designed to ameliorate this deprivation.And the postwar shelter was a special world with its own norms ofbehavior and forms of social control. It was an institution that in manyrespects formed the psyche of a whole generation. Its children learnedto live by the unwritten rules of shelter society , and it was no accidentthat in their subsequent adult life the social relations formed in theshelter played no less a role than those of blood relations. These peoplewere team players, disdaining individualism; and yet, ironically , it wasespecially in their midst that striking forms of individualism took root.
The society emerging from the war differed from conventional society
not only in its demographic structure but also in its social composition.It was no longer made up of the traditional categories – the urban andrural, industrial workers and civil servants, youth and pensioners – but282 ELENA ZUBKOVA
10Dokladnaia zapiska upolnomochenogo Komissii partiinogo kontrolia pri TsK VKP(b)
po Gor ¢kovskoi oblasti “O neudovletvoritel ¢nom kul ¢turno-bytovom obsluzhivanii i
proizvodstvennykh usloviakh rabochikh-podrostkov na riade predpriiatii Gor ¢kovskoi
oblasti, 11 June 1945; RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 122, d. 103, l. 77.
11Ibid.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
rather of a mentality born of the war. In this sense the most prominent
face of postwar society was that of the man in uniform, the veteran.Toward the end of the war, the Soviet army numbered 11 millionpeople.
12According to the law of 23 June 1945 on demobilization, the
ﬁrst to be discharged from the army were the thirteen most senior age-groups, and by 1948 the process of demobilization was fundamentallycomplete. A total of 8.5 million men were demobilized.
13
In various ways, everybody faced the problem of transition from war
to peace, economically , socially , and psychologically . Of course, theprocess affected most the interests of those now completely alienatedfrom civilian society , those who had lived four years in a different envi-ronment, the soldiers. The gravity of the losses, the material depriva-tions experienced with minor exceptions by everyone, were aggravatedfor the veterans by the additional psychological problems inherent in thetransition to civilian life. For many , therefore, the mobilization that hadbeen so much anticipated at the front turned into a serious problem in itself – specially for the youngest soldiers, those born in the years1923–7, who had gone to the front straight from the schoolroomwithout the chance to acquire any occupational experience at all. Warwas their only profession, their only competence the capacity to wieldweapons and ﬁght. Moreover, this generation had suffered losses greaterthan any other, especially in the ﬁrst year of combat. The war to aremarkable degree washed away the boundaries between age-groups.The various generations, their human losses mounting, virtuallymerged into one – the generation of victors – forming thereby a newmentality that united them in a shared community of problems, atti-tudes, wishes, and aspirations. Of course, this community of concernswas relative – even in the war there was no perfect unity among soldiers– but the spirit of front-line brotherhood continued for a long time toinﬂuence the postwar atmosphere.
The majority of demobilized veterans sought work almost at once.
Thus, according to the ﬁgures of some forty regional party committees,of 2.7 million recently demobilized persons in January 1946, 2.1million (71.1 percent) were employed. Of the number of veteransemployed at that time, more than half (55 percent) worked on collec-tive farms or state farms.
14The ﬁgures on veterans’ employment varied
signiﬁcantly by different regions. In Irkutsk Province, for example, inJanuary 1946 more than half of the able-bodied returning veterans hadRUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 283
12Istoriia SSSR s drevneishikh vremen , 11:53.
13Ibid., 56.
14Informatsiia Organizatsionno-instruktorskogo otdela TsK VKP(b) o vypolnenii
postanovleniia TsK VKP(b) ot 25 avgusta 1945 g. “O rabote mestnykh partiinykh organizatsii i sovetskikh organov po ustroistvu demobilizovannykh iz deistvuiushcheiarmii,” 11 March 1946; RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 122, d. 145, l. 193.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
not found work; in the city of Tiumen, 59 percent were unemployed; in
Astrakhan Province, 64 percent.15The reasons for this situation varied.
Sometimes there was no work for the particular specialty in which thedemobilized were qualiﬁed; sometimes they were offered unskilled workand pay not commensurate with their qualiﬁcations. Thus of forty-seven demobilized veterans returning to the factory Red Chemist inVladimir Province, only sixteen received work in their ﬁeld of qualiﬁca-tion, while the remainder were directed to wood-cutting.
16This state of
affairs was similar in other regions.
In addition to the problem of ﬁnding work was the problem of ﬁnding
living space, a matter especially acute in areas that had suffered heavycombat damage. In such places many families of the demobilized had tolive in dugouts or in other poor substitutes for homes. It was not onlythe demobilized who lived in such conditions, however, and the masteryof primitive circumstances was only one of the strategies of survival inpostwar society .
The war, it seemed, had exhausted the last reserves of human
strength. The Soviet army , alone among those engaged in the war, didnot follow the practice of granting rest-and-recreation furloughs (withthe exception of short-term leaves for the wounded). Czech historianBoguslav Shnaider [Czech Bohuslav S ˇnajder – H.R.] observed that
human losses in the Soviet army could have been fewer had it not suf-fered unremitting psychological overload. “Soldiers of the Red Armywere under constant psychological pressure, which was unprecedentedin the history of warfare. Fatigue and psychic exhaustion exceeded allimaginable limits.”
17This fatigue made itself felt after the war as well.
The veterans noticed with surprise that during the war, constantly shuttling between life and death, people did not suffer from conven-tional “peacetime” illnesses. When the war ended, on the other hand,such illnesses quickly reappeared: their reserves of physical resistancehad run out. By no means everyone returned from the front in goodhealth. While we have statistics, however imprecise, on the wartimelosses, until this day we lack ﬁgures on those who died of wounds andillnesses after the war. Toward the end, among those demobilized ongrounds of health, there were 2 million invalids; and among them,around 450,000 with one amputated limb and around 350,000 witha diagnosis of osteomyelitis (inﬂammation of bone marrow).
18The284 ELENA ZUBKOVA
15Ibid., l. 194.
16Ibid.
17Boguslav Shnaider, “Neizvestnaia voina,” V oprosy istorii , 1995, No. 1: 110.
18Dokladnaia zapiska zaveduiushchego otdelom Upravleniia Kadrov TsK VKP(b) Petrova
“O neobkhodimosti perestroiki dela lechebnoi pomoshchi invalidam Otechestvennoivoiny ,” 25 April 1945; RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 117, d. 511, l. 107.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
invalids, more even than the other veterans, were in need not only of
surgery or medication but of psychological treatment as well. Towardthe end of the war, however, only a third of the inﬁrmaries for invalidshad a physician attached, not to speak of full medical services.
19Much
more complicated for the invalids than for the other veterans was thesearch for work, and the situation of those who had lost their sight waspractically hopeless. Without supplementary income, it was very difﬁ-cult, almost impossible, to live on a single invalid’s pension. The beggingof cripples around bazaars and railroad stations became a characteris-tic feature of the time. Invalids were required to undergo an annualmedical examination – to conﬁrm the continuation of their disability –a procedure exacted even of those who had lost a limb at the front (“asif it would grow back,” in the grim joke of the veterans). The majorityof invalids left thus on the sidelines of life were young people; and theirconsciousness of not being needed, their superﬂuousness in the newpostwar life, for the sake of which they had sacriﬁced themselves, wasespecially painful.
Other veterans were able to get good work or prestigious duties and
to enter institutes of higher education or continue studies interruptedby the war. Their acquisition of a higher social status, however much itwas deserved, nevertheless introduced a notorious difference of interestinto this social community formerly so closely knit. It prompted aprocess that Mikhail Gefter denominated “the fracturing of the genera-tion of victors,”
20and it was not in the least spontaneous but was delib-
erately orchestrated from above.21
The veterans returning from the war were sometimes considered
potential neo-Decembrists, suggesting an analogy with the develop-ments in Russia after the War of 1812, in particular the uprising ofseveral regiments in St. Petersburg in December 1825.
22This potentialRUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 285
19Ibid., 108.
20Mikhail Gefter, “Stalin umer vchera. . . . ,” in A. A. Protashchik, ed., Inogo ne dano
(Moscow, 1988), 305.
21One of the ﬁrst problems of the deliberate division of Soviet society into different inter-
est groups after the war was described by Vera S. Dunham, In Stalin’s Time: Middleclass
Values in Soviet Fiction (Cambridge, MA, 1976), 12.
22For all of the differences in the historical conditions of the two wars, that of 1812 and
that of 1941–5, they had similar sociopsychological consequences: the awakening of thespirit of freedom, the aspirations of the people for a better life as a reward for the victory ,the birth of progressive political ideas among the intelligentsia and others. There was alsosome parallel in the moods of the peasantry in favor of the abolition of serfdom in theearlier case and of the abolition of the collective farm in the second. Both wars also provided an impetus for reevaluation of political values in the minds of social groups participating in the power structure, some representatives of which gradually formedconservative and reformist wings. [That is, they were opposed to the radical storm and stress approach to economic planning and expansion, in favor of emphasizing consumer
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
was not, of course, realized, in any event not directly , in the early
postwar years, as it was suppressed by the regime. Thus the question isalmost never raised: were the veterans capable of forming an active forcefor political ( obshchestvennyi ) change immediately after the war? I pose
this question quite seriously , not merely to assess the potential strengthof the forces committed to freedom but in order to identify a momentwhen progressive reforms might have found sufﬁciently broad socialsupport. If we continue the analogy with the Decembrists, then thefactor of timing appears to be a key consideration: the Decembrist upris-ing occurred more than twelve years after the end of the war of 1812– again, not accidentally . The war alone did not engender political posi-tions, not to speak of forming organizations for the pursuit of politicalactivity , because war assigns other duties. But war also modiﬁes thebases of cultural life, stimulates a reexamination of conventionalassumptions, and forms a moral-psychological foundation for thefuture. What comes of it all depends on the particular conditions ofthe postwar years. It must be obvious, however, that the ﬁrst years afterthe end of a successful war are not the most favorable time to engage ina struggle with the victorious government. The poor prospects of suchan open confrontation in the Soviet Union in 1945 may be explained bythe inﬂuence of several factors.
First, the very character of the war – patriotic, liberating, just – pre-
supposes the unity of the society – people and government – in the com-mitment to a national cause, the expulsion of the enemy . Victory in sucha war was envisioned as a triumph of the entire nation. Linked by acommon interest, the common challenge of survival, the community ofgovernment and people was gradually forged as they jointly laid asidethe assumptions of civilian life and brought together the deceived hopesbelow and the crisis of command above.
Second, we must consider the psychological factor of the overload of
stress on the people, of four years spent in the trenches and the conse-quent need for emotional release, for liberation from the endurance test.The people, having long borne the burdens of demolition, naturallygrasped the opportunity for peaceful construction. At this juncture, theenjoyment of peace was of premium value and excluded any consider-ation of violence. “The massive homelessness of millions of people,which is to say , the war, is sickening,” Emmanuil Kazakevich wrote fromthe front; “more than the danger and the risk, it is really the homeless-286 ELENA ZUBKOVA
industry rather than the capital goods industries – in Soviet parlance, Group B and Group
A respectively – and committed to economic concessions for the peasantry . – H.R.] Thiswing of the administration was characterized by a wish to turn from the idea of auto-cratic power – the vozhd ¢, leader, Stalin – to power limited to some degree by the inﬂu-
ence of democratic institutions.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
ness. . . .”23Speaking in May 1945 to a group of writers, her colleagues,
Vera Ketlinskaia summoned them to envision in all of its complexity“not only the pride of the victors but the enormous grief of the long-suffering people.”
24
A period of convalescence, both physical and emotional, was in-
evitable after the war, a complex and painful period of restoration ofcivilian life in which conventional problems, such as housing, mighthave to remain unresolved for a time. The problem of housing was notonly one of living space: one of the most serious problems after the warwas the establishment of a family life. The leading challenge for the vet-erans of the time was to readjust to such a life, to enroll themselves init, to learn to live in such an unaccustomed way . “Everybody wanted toorganize some kind of life,” Viacheslav Kondratiev recalls. “We had tolive. Some married. Others entered the party ....W e  had to adjust to a
new life. There was no alternative.”
25Perhaps some people had alter-
natives, but for the majority of veterans the problem of reintegratinginto civilian life was depressingly simple. They had to take life as theyfound it.
Third, loyal to the Soviet order though they were, not all veterans
looked upon it as ideal, or even as just. The facts of the prewar years,the experience of the war, and observations during the campaign inEurope forced them to reﬂect, to wonder about the justice of elements ofthe regime, if not of the regime as a whole. There was not necessarily adirect link, however, between dissatisfaction with the structure of life athome and action aimed at changing it. The establishment of such a linkdepended upon the evolution of a concrete program of future action, aconception of goals and a mechanism for their realization; but no suchinstrument existed. “There was much in the system that we did notaccept, but we could not imagine any other kind,” Viacheslav Kondratiev admitted.
26This statement may seem surprising, but it
reﬂects a contradiction characteristic of people’s thinking in the postwaryears. The regime was perceived as an inﬂexible given, irremediable andindependent of human will, of one’s own aspirations and wishes.
All of these factors allow us to afﬁrm the impossibility during the ﬁrst
days after the victory of open popular opposition to authority . Such wasthe peculiarity of the moment. Yet the potential for the development ofa mature and dynamic political opposition was present. That is, therewas a fully possible prospect that the veterans themselves – the liberalRUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 287
23Emmanuil Kazakevich, Slushaia vremia: Dnevniki, zapisnye knizhki, pis ¢ma (Moscow,
1990), 259.
24RGALI, f. 631, op. 15, d. 737, l. 86.
25Interview with V . L. Kondrat ¢ev; author’s personal archive.
26Viacheslav Kondrat ¢ev , “Ne tol ¢ko o svoem pokolenii,” Kommunist , 1990, No. 7: 115.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
fraction of them – could become a potential support and one of the prin-
cipal moving forces of a future process of reform. Reform is usually pre-ceded by an emotionally critical stage characterized by a mental fermentand the consolidation of active political forces. The war initiated thisstage, which continued long after the war had ended. Although its development proceeded by increments, obscured by the many mundaneproblems, the process produced distinct forms of expression.
It was sustained particularly by the channels of communications
among the veterans, who after the war remained in contact with eachother, destined to be a part of an invisible network, a combat commu-nity with its attendant legacy of common postwar problems. Life in thecommunal huts and apartments so typical of the time was an awkwardmedium for this kind of intercourse. Therefore it took place as a ruleaway from home, either in the student dormitories to which many vet-erans returned, or, more typically , in newly opened cafés, snack bars,and beer halls – “blue Danubes,” as they were called. These latter placesbecame the refuges of veterans’ social life and gave rise to an altogetherpeculiar phenomenon of the time, “tavern” ( shalmannaia ) democracy .
How many of these holes-in-the-wall, snack bars, pavilions, and taverns
(shalmany ), these blue Danubes, were opened by the wrecked and half-
destitute country in order to comfort and warm the returning soldiers, inorder to provide them the glow of an evening’s uninhibited company , tohelp them speak out, to soften their hardened souls, to enable them tolook one another in the eye unhurriedly and to realize that a seeminglyunimaginable peace and quiet had really come? In the inconceivably closespaces between shell-scarred houses, in the open ﬁelds, among huts andfences, in rustic groves these evening retreats sprang up, and here popularparlance, ignoring the street address, ﬁxed to each establishment a dis-tinct and indelible name, which is not to be found in the guidebooks.
27
This modest portrait from Viktor Smirnov’s story “Zaulki” (Back
Streets) tells us what the blue Danubes were in the life of people return-ing from the war. They were merely everyday life, yet they were so muchmore.
Led by their own problems in separate ways, the veterans came
together again where the nostalgia of the front reigned. And the morecommonplace or desperate postwar life became, the more sharply anddistinctly were the values of the warrior imprinted in their conscious-ness, especially those making him “indispensably necessary .” The peace-ful life was already structured on other principles: the soldier whoexperienced during wartime the feeling that “he alone held the fate of288 ELENA ZUBKOVA
27Viktor Smirnov , “Zaulki: Povest ¢,” Roman-gazeta , 1989, No. 3–4: 8.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the country in his hands” was driven after the war to the sad admission
that “with me, without me, everything goes on anyway .”28The former
values persisted only among a narrow circle of friends, really only in thelittle retreats of blue Danubes. “9 May , 1950,” Emmanuil Kazakevichnoted in his diary , “the Day of Victor y...I  w e n t  t o  a  beer bar. Two
invalids and a plumber ...w ere drinking beer and reminiscing about
the war. One of them wept and said: If there were another war, I wouldg o .... ”
29
Nostalgia for the front inspired the tone of camaraderie in the blue
Danubes, where candor in conversation and sentiment was habitual,notwithstanding the presence of spies. There society was constituted asformerly by the laws of war, and the openness with which people sharedtheir experience contrasted with the completely different spirit saturat-ing the atmosphere outside. Whatever we may think of these blueDanubes, they came to embody by force of circumstance the last refugeof the spirit of freedom brought from the front. All the other channelswere simply closed; and it was not the fault of the veterans that, in placeof genuine freedom, all that was left them was the freedom to talk overa glass of beer, or that this freedom, too, was soon taken away , puttingthe ﬁnishing touches on a deliberate campaign to wipe out the poten-tial beneﬁts inherent in the victory .
This campaign began in fact on the day after the victory , the credit
for which was immediately divided and apportioned. On the day whenthe war ended, Pravda distributed the credit for the victory in the fol-
lowing fashion: “The victory did not come of itself. It was won by the self-
sacriﬁce, the heroism, the military mastery of the Red Army and of thewhole Soviet people. It was organized by our invincible Bolshevik Party ,
the party of Lenin and Stalin, it was led by our great Stalin. . . . Long live
our great Stalinist victory!”
30[Author’s emphasis – E.Z.] And so the
victory was called “ours” and “Stalin’s” simultaneously , but the subtextwas obvious: “our” victory occurred only because it was primordially“Stalin’s.” In the same issue of Pravda , in the column entitled “News
from Abroad,” the victory was characterized as “a day forecast byComrade Stalin.”
31
In his “ Address to the People” Stalin himself distributed the empha-
sis somewhat differently . The vozhd ¢(leader) addressed himself to “com-
patriots, fellow countrymen and countrywomen,” giving the obligatorycredit to the victorious people: “The great sacriﬁces that we have borneRUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 289
28Viacheslav Kondrat ¢ev , “Paradoksy frontovoi nostal ¢gii,” Literaturnaia gazeta , 9 May
1990, 9.
29Kazakevich, Slushaia vremia , 28.
30Pravda , 9 May 1945.
31Ibid.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
in the name of the freedom and independence of our Fatherland, the
innumerable deprivations and losses suffered by our people in the courseof the war, the intensive labor in the rear and at the front, offered on thealtar of the country , have not been made in vain and eventuated in thecomplete victory over the enemy .”
32The address contained not a word
of the party and its role in the organization of victory . Stalin simplyexcluded this intermediary link between himself and the people.
On 24 May Stalin pronounced his famous toast “to the health of the
Russian people,” naming the Russian people “the leading force of theSoviet Union among all the people of our country .” Speaking of it as the “leading people,” he again remained silent on the “leading party .”
33
A month later, on 25 June, at a reception in the Kremlin in honor of theparticipants in the victory parade, a fresh nuance appeared in Stalin’sinterpretation, the so-called “proposition of the screws.” In spite of thefrequency of the citation of this toast, taken out of context it offers onlya limited opportunity for analysis. In any event, the context of the occa-sion is no less important than the content of the toast. Stalin spoketoward the end of the reception, after the tributes in honor of the mili-tary commanders, the scientiﬁc and technical advisers, and the indus-trial leaders had already been made. The keynote of his speech was clear.He proposed a toast “to the health of the people of modest rank andobscure station. To the people who may be considered the screws in thegreat machine of state, without whom we, the marshals and comman-ders of the front armies, to put it crudely , are not worth a farthing. Theseare the people who sustain us, as a foundation supports a summit.”
34
Stalin thus revised his former thesis on the union of leader and people,sketching their relationship as one of summit and base, thereby neces-sarily diminishing the status of the latter from that of “great people” topeople as screws – cogs – in the machine. The toast contained an addi-tional thought: Stalin not only established the hierarchical principle inthe community of leader and people; he also set the simple peopleagainst their superiors, their bosses – beneath his own level, of course– preserving for himself the function of supreme arbiter at the nexuswhere the lines of the management of the masses and the managementof the bosses came together.
Even before the importation from the war of the grim dichotomy 
ofusand them began to change the nature of personal relations, 
Stalin tried consciously or unconsciously to direct the process into thechannel that he needed. He removed himself from the society of we,290 ELENA ZUBKOVA
32Ibid., 10 May 1945.
33Ibid., 25 May 1945.
34Ibid., 27 June 1945.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
moved into a kind of solitude, preserving for himself the right of orches-
trating the process of marking sociopolitical boundaries, among which was the deﬁnition of “ours,” “not ours,” “theirs,” and “theenemies’.” This was in reality a return to the prewar system of powerrelations, reestablishing the absolute power of the leader and ignoringthose who genuinely deserved the credit for the victory . It was not sur-prising that many veterans felt offended and bitter to be assigned to theranks of mere “screws.” And although propaganda afﬁrmed that thewords of the leader about the screws were affectionate and fatherly andthat they “exalt all our people,” these illusions did not prevail. Life itselfleft few hopes and illusions. The veterans, by their own admissions, felt less and less needed, and some of them, the invalids, felt entirelysuperﬂuous.
“How to Live After the War?”: The Conﬂict of Expectation 
and Reality
The war changed the face of world politics. The common threat brought
nations together, postponed their usual quarrels, and turned nationalpride and ethnic antagonisms into unwanted handicaps. The worldwidecataclysm diverted the nations from the usual posturing about the superiority of one political system or another and encouraged them toembrace the priority of common human values and the idea of globalunity . At the end of the war this idea seemed about to materialize, con-ciliating the conﬂicts among recent allies and damping the ardor of thediehard revanchists. Even the genesis of the Cold War, followed by theatomic psychosis, could not entirely scotch the idea of a Common European Home. Of course, merely beginning to turn this idea into political reality required the passage of several decades and the changeof several political generations. The postwar leaders continued to thinkin terms of the old categories of confrontation: one side feared thespread of communist contagion, and the other guarded itself againstbourgeois inﬂuence. The iron curtain descended between East and WestEurope. Thereafter Soviet citizens could only guess at what was goingon in the world, until they realized with bitter surprise that the defeatedenemy had quickly regained his feet and laid the foundations of a newand vigorous life, while they themselves were subsisting on meagerrations and blaming their misery on the consequences of the war.
But it did not have to be so. The victory offered Russia the opportu-
nity to choose whether to develop itself together with the civilized worldor to go its own way as formerly in the tradition of socialist messianism.There was without doubt an alternative to the policy of isolation.RUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 291
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
The victory raised to an unprecedented height not only the interna-
tional prestige of the Soviet Union but the authority of the regime insidethe country as well. “Drunk with the conceit of victory ,” wrote theveteran Fedor Abramov , “we decided that our system was ideal, ...a n d
we not only neglected to improve it, but, on the contrary , we grew evermore dogmatic about it.”
35The Russian philosopher Georgii Fedotov ,
reﬂecting on the inﬂuence of Stalin’s soaring authority on the develop-ment of internal political processes, also came to a disturbing conclu-sion: “Our forebears, in the company of foreigners, felt compelled toblush for Russian autocracy and serfdom. If they had observed suchworldwide servility before the tsar as Europe and America exhibitedbefore Stalin, it would not have occurred to them to feel embarrassedabout the behavior of their countrymen.”
36
The saying “victors are not to be judged” is not an acquittal but a
cause for reﬂection, as illustrated by Viktor Nekrasov’s comments:
Alas! We excused Stalin for everything! Collectivization, the purges, the
execution of his colleagues, the defeats of 1941. And he, of course, thenunderstood all the power of the people believing in his genius, understoodthat there could no longer be any mistake about that, that only throwingthe harsh truth [he was indispensable! – H.R.] in their face would unitethem, that there could be no return to the rivers of blood, not of the war,but of the prewar period. And we, callow intelliligentsia, having becomesoldiers, believed in this myth with our whole heart and entered the partyof Lenin and Stalin.
37
May 1945 was the high point of the authority of Stalin. His name
was linked in the mind of the masses with the victory , and he was per-ceived as being virtually the bearer of divine providence. The war cor-respondent Alexander Avdeenko recalls going to the victory parade withhis young son.
I take my son in my arms, raise him up. The Lenin Mausoleum is ten
meters or a little more away . The reviewing stand and everybody on it isas if in the palm of our hands.“Do you see him?”“ Aha. Standing in the rain. The old man. Is he getting wet?”“Tempered steel does not fear rain.”“Is he a man of steel? Is that why he is called Stalin?”292 ELENA ZUBKOVA
35Fedor Abramov , “ A liudi zhdut, zhdut peremen: Iz dnevnikovykh i rabochikh zapisei,”
Izvestia , 3 February 1990.
36Georgii Fedotov , “Rossiia i svoboda,” Znamia , 1989, No. 12: 214.
37Viktor Nekrasov , “Tragediia moego pokoleniia. V okopakh Stalingrada: Do i posle,” 
Literaturnaia gazeta , 12 September 1990, 15.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
“ An ordinary man, but a will of steel.”
“Papa, why is he not happy , is he mad at somebody?”“ At God, probably , who didn’t send us good weather.”“So why didn’t Stalin order God to send us good weather ...? ”
38
Stalin the man had by this time been so transformed into the idol of
the vozhd ¢that he virtually acquired the image of a living icon. The mass
consciousness, attributing mystical power to the icon, as it was supposedto do, canonized all that was identiﬁed with it, be it the authority of thesystem or the authority of the ideas on which the system was based.Such was the contradictory role of the victory , which brought both the spirit of freedom and the psychological instruments thwarting thefurther development of that spirit, the instruments that perpetuated thesupremacy of the alleged architect of victory . The euphoria of victorywas not the most receptive atmosphere for discussing social problems,and this fact constitutes an obstacle to our analysis of the situation,though it does not entirely spoil it.
Otherwise, Georgii Fedotov , imagining all the obstacles to a progres-
sive transformation of the Soviet regime, could scarcely have written in1945 that “there is now no more agonizing issue in Russia than that offreedom. Not in the sense, of course, of the question whether it exists inthe USSR, something that only foreigners, the most ignorant of them,can contemplate. But rather whether its rebirth is possible after a victo-rious war. That is what we are all thinking now, we genuine democratsand semifascist fellow travelers alike.”
39As for the question whether it
was possible, neither Fedotov nor other soberly thinking people inside oroutside the country gave a single uniform answer. Certainly they did notimagine a sudden metamorphosis into democracy in the USSR. Theysimply evaluated the postwar situation as a chance for the developmentof freedom, although they did not consider it to be promising.
The democratic traditions in the internal life of the country were 
very weak. The structures of political and cultural life gravitated dis-tinctly toward authoritarian forms and were not receptive to innova-tions of an alien kind. But the war, in opening a window onto the worldat large, permitted a view of the democratic experience of Europe andAmerica. Not by chance, Mikhail Gefter, considering the evolution ofattitudes of people during the war, wrote that “we are, of course,Russian and Soviet, but we have seen the world, too.”
40The war
expanded the scope of the Russian outlook and the perspective in whichRUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 293
38Cited in “Dnevniki vesti ne razreshalos ¢,” Sovetskaia kul ¢tura , 25 April 1990.
39Fedotov , “Rossiia i svoboda,” 198.
40Mikhail Gefter, “Stalin umer vchera. . . . ,” in A. A. Protashchik, ed., Inogo ne dano
(Moscow, 1988), 305.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
the individual could imagine his own potential. In spring 1945 “people
not without grounds considered themselves giants,” as Emmanuil Kazakevich expressed it.
41
The veterans entered an atmosphere of peacetime life without for-
getting the most terrible and dreadful war. The reality of peacetime wasmore complex, however, than they had imagined, not at all what it hadappeared from the vantage point of the trenches. “In the army we oftenspoke of what life would be like after the war,” recalled the journalistBoris Galin, “how we would live on the day after the victory; and thenearer the end of the war came, the more we thought of it, and we pic-tured things in rainbow colors. We never imagined the scale of destruc-tion or the scope of reconstruction required to heal the wounds inﬂictedby the Germans.”
42Konstantin Simonov largely agreed: “We imagined
life after the war as a holiday that would begin when the last shot wasﬁred.”
43It was difﬁcult for people to entertain other expectations after
four years of the extraordinary stress of combat. It was altogetherunderstandable that a normal life, a simple life in which one was notsubjected to constant danger, seemed during wartime to be a providen-tial promise. The war led people, those at the front and those in the rear,to romanticize the prewar period and to a certain extent to idealize it.Enduring the deprivations of the war years, people often subconsciouslyrevised their recollections of peacetime, remembering the good and for-getting the bad. The wish to restore time past prompted the simplestanswer to the question, “How to live after the war?” “ As before the war,”of course.
Life as holiday , life as fairy tale: with the help of this image in the mass
mind a special conception of postwar life was formed – without contra-dictions, without pressure – a tendency stimulated in reality by onefactor, hope. Such a life existed, however, only in books and the theater.It is a fascinating fact that during the war the libraries experienced anincreased demand for the literature of adventure and fairy tales.
44On
the one hand, this interest is explained in part by the change in the ageof the people working in the libraries and using them. During the war50 to 70 percent of teenagers went into industrial production. After thewar the reading rooms of libraries were ﬁlled by young veterans whoseintellectual growth had been interrupted by the war and who conse-quently returned from the front to the reading tastes of their youth. But294 ELENA ZUBKOVA
41Emmanuil Kazakevich, Slushaia vremia: Dnevniki, zapisnye knizhki, pis ¢ma (Moscow,
1990), 316.
42Boris Galin, “V odnom naselennom punkte: Rasskaz propagandista,” Novyi mir , 1947,
No. 11: 162–3.
43K. M. Simonov , Sobranie sochinenii , 6 vols. (Moscow, 1966–70), 3: 124.
44RGALI, f. 631, op. 15, d. 737, ll. 86–7.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
there is another side of the question: the growth of interest in this genre
of literature and ﬁlms was a choice to reject the cruel reality of the war.It was a demand for compensation for psychic overload. Thus it was pos-sible to observe during the war, as for example Mansur Abdulin tells us, “the enormous appetite for all that was not related to the war, forﬁlms with dancing and merrymaking, for performing artists and comedians.”
45The faith that life after the war would quickly improve
continued for several years after it ended.
Kubanskie kazaki (Kuban Cossacks) was the most popular of all
postwar ﬁlms. It depicted the life of a village in the north Caucasus afterthe war as contented, abundant, and joyful. Reality was utterly differ-ent, of course, and the ﬁlm was consequently subjected to severe andappropriate criticism. But the critics did not consider one circum-stance: there was an element of truth in this ﬁlm-fable that conveyedthe spirit of the time. The journalist Tatiana Arkhangelskaia remembersan interview with one of the participants in the making of the ﬁlm, whotold how hungry the well-dressed boys and girls were, while in the ﬁlmthey happily gazed on a surfeit of fruits made of plaster and papier-mâché. “But we believed,” she added, “that it would be that way andthere would be plenty of everything . . . all one could wish. And we
needed to think so in order to sing songs and make everything seem allright.”
46
Hope for the better and the optimism that it nourished imparted a
kind of shock tempo to the ﬁrst stages of postwar life, generating aspecial, victorious public atmosphere. “My whole generation, with theexception of just a few, experienced the difﬁculties,” remembers thebuilder V . P . Serikov . “But our spirits didn’t fall. The chief thing was thatthe war was behind us. There was the joy of work, of victory , a spirit ofcompetition.”
47The emotional élan of the people, the aspiration actu-
ally to realize through work a peaceful life, enabled them quickly enoughto resolve the basic tasks of reconstruction. This outlook, however,notwithstanding its great creative force, bore within itself a tendency ofanother kind: the need for a relatively painless transition to peace (“theworst is behind us”) and the perception of this process as generallyuntroubled. The farther it proceeded, the greater was the intrusion ofreality , which was in no hurry to turn into life as fairy tale.
The difﬁculties of life, unavoidable after such a destructive war, were
accepted as normal by the majority of the population, with resignation.RUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 295
45Cited in “Shel soldat. ..., ”  Komsomol ¢skaia pravda , 28 April 1990.
46Cited in Elizar Mal ¢tsev , “Ne izmeniaia sebe,” Literaturnaia gazeta , 18 February 
1987, 8.
47Vladislav Serikov , “Dogovor po sovesti,” Roman-gazeta , 1986, No. 7: 9.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Far from all problems inherited from the war, however, belonged to the
normal category . The plenipotentiaries of the Central Committee wereforced to admit as much after examining the conditions of life in different regions of the country . In December 1945 a delegation fromthe Agitation and Propaganda Department of the Central Committeeundertook an inspection of the coal-mining industry in Shchekinsk District of Tula Province in central Russia. The results were alarming.The living conditions of the workers were recognized as “very difﬁcult,”and the repatriated and demobilized workers lived especially poorly .Many of them lacked underwear, and the little that was available wasworn out and dirty . They went for months without soap, the dormi-tories were very crowded, the inhabitants slept on wooden platforms or similar double-tiered bunks (for which they paid 10 percent of theirmonthly income). They received enough bread, 1200 grams a day , but its quality was poor. There was not enough butter, and petroleumproducts were used as butter substitutes.
48
There were many signs of poor food supply in the localities. Groups
of workers from Penza and Kuznetsk wrote letters to Politburo mem-bers V . M. Molotov , M. I. Kalinin, and A. I. Mikoyan, complaining of thedifﬁcult material conditions of life and the absence of the majority of necessary goods from the market.
49In response to these letters a com-
mission of the People’s Commissiariat of Trade investigated and deter-mined that the workers’ complaints were well-founded.
50In Nizhnyi
Lomov of Penza Province the workers of factory No. 255 spoke outagainst the delay in the issuance of bread cards, and the workers of theplywood and match factories complained of long delays in receivingtheir pay .
51The difﬁcult working conditions at the war’s end persisted in
restored enterprises. Many people continued to work without shelter, inthe open air, and during the winter, knee-deep in snow . Workplaces wereoften not lighted or heated, and people were poorly clothed for winterconditions. For this reason the secretaries of many local party commit-tees in Siberia turned to the Central Committee with an unprecedentedrequest: to allow them to skip the annual revolutionary anniversary celebration of 7 November 1946 on account of the “inadequate cloth-ing of the population.”
52296 ELENA ZUBKOVA
48Informatsiia Upravleniia propagandy i agitatsii TsK VKP(b) “O material ¢no-bytovom
polozhenii rabochikh ugol ¢noi promyshlennosti Tul ¢skoi oblasti,” January 1946;
RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 125, d. 421, ll. 2–3.
49Informatsiia Upravleniia propagandy i agitatsii TsK VKP(b) o polozhenii del v Penzen-
skoi oblasti v sviazi s podgotovkoi k vyboram v Verkhovnyi Sovet SSSR, January 1946;ibid., d. 420, l. 40.
50Ibid.
51Ibid.
52Informatsiia Upravleniia propagandy i agitatsii TsK VKP(b) o podgotovke k prazdno-
vaniiu 29oi godovshchiny Oktiabr ¢skoi revoliutsii, November 1946; ibid., d. 421, l. 102.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Poor living conditions were one of the chief sources of dissatisfaction
and agitation among the workers of the Urals and Siberia, most ofwhom were evacuees from the combat zones farther west. At war’s endthese people naturally wanted to return home. A commission of theCentral Committee reviewed the situation of a series of defense plantsin September and October 1945. It found distressing conditions, par-ticularly in a tank factory in Omsk.
The insistent demands of the workers to return to their former places of
residence are prompted by the difﬁcult living conditions [and by] dissat-isfaction with the supply of clothes and shoes as well as food products.. . . Houses and dormitories are poorly constructed and not suitable forSiberian wintertime conditions. . . . The workers and their families
endure extremely acute shortages of clothing, shoes, and linens. Annualproduction of textile goods is about .38 items per worker and of shoes .7pairs per worker. Some workers are so poorly clothed that they cannotshow up at their place of work.
53
The workers protested against such living conditions. They refused to
work more than eight hours a day , expressed open displeasure at theadministration of enterprises, demanded their immediate return toformer places of residence (the majority of the workers in Omsk hadbeen evacuated from Leningrad, Voroshilovgrad, and other such cities).The situation was similar in the factories of the Urals and Siberia.
54In
order to forestall the further development of such attitudes among evacuated workers, special orders were issued forbidding them to leavetheir place of work under threat of legal liability . Not even threateningmeasures, however, sufﬁced to stop the elemental movement to returnhome. In August 1945 the People’s Commissariat of Military Censor-ship registered 135 letters from Omsk workers addressed to relatives andfriends, complaining of bad living conditions. “Conditions of life in thefactory are terrible,” according to one of these letters. “People areputting together a pack of supplies and ﬂeeing, especially Leningraders.About four hundred have left recently . The order of the CommissarMalyshev is to return all those ﬂeeing to Omsk and to prosecute them.We’ll see what develops.”
55The writers of some letters expressed them-RUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 297
53Dokladnaia zapiska zaveduiushchego otdelom Upravleniia kadrov TsK VKP(b) 
Borodina o polozhenii del na tankovom zavode v gorode Omske, 18 September 1945;ibid., op. 117, d. 530, ll. 37–8.
54Iurii Aksiutin, “Pochemu Stalin dal ¢neishemu sotrudnichestvu s soiuznikami posle
pobedy predpochel konfrontatsiiu s nimi: Nekotorye sotsial ¢no-psikhologicheskie aspekty
vozniknoveniia kholodnoi voiny ,” in M. M. Narinskii et al., eds., Kholodnaia voina: Novye
podkhody, novye dokumenty (Moscow, 1995), 52–3.
55Vyderzhki iz pisem rabochikh zavodov g. Omska, zaderzhannykh Voennoi tsenzuroi
NKGB SSSR, 19 September 1945; RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 117, d. 530, l. 54.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
selves more decisively: “The workers have given all their strength to
defeat the enemy , and they want to return home, to their own people,their own homes. And now it turns out we have been deceived. They’veshipped us out of Leningrad, and they want to leave us in Siberia. In thiscase we workers should say that our government has betrayed us andour work. They might imagine what kind of humor this leaves us in.”
56
Workers’ demonstrations took place in several defense plants of the
Urals and Siberia from July to September 1945. The situation grew soacute that on 4 August 1945 the Secretariat of the Central Committeegave special attention to the question. It ordered the administration inthree factories where working conditions were most distressing to take urgent measures for the satisfaction of the legal demands of theiremployees (that is, with the exception of their demand to returnhome).
57
The situation was scarcely better in the villages, many of which, 
especially in the regions subjected during the war to German occupa-tion, were virtually depopulated. The population of the collective farms(including persons demobilized) toward the end of 1945 comprised only 85 percent of that of 1940; and the able-bodied proportion, only67.5 percent of the prewar level.
58The number of able-bodied men 
was reduced from 16.9 million in 1940 to 6.5 million at the begin-ning of 1946.
59In several regions, for example in northern Russia, 
there were villages to which no live adult male returned.60Sown acreage
was naturally reduced during the war, which of course depressed the harvest yield. The productivity of the collective farm lands fell as aresult of the deterioration of work in the ﬁelds and the decline of thelevel of scientiﬁc agronomy . Women constituted the basic element of theable-bodied population of the village. They had to do all of the heavywork, and the administrative responsibilities were handled after the war by men. Collective farm production at the end of the war was in acritical condition, the peasants living essentially from their own privateplots.
Besides destruction and ruin the war left another singular legacy , 
the growth of crime. This problem was felt especially acutely by the298 ELENA ZUBKOVA
56Ibid., l. 57.
57Postanovlenie Sekretariata TsK VKP(b) “O meropriiatiiakh po uluchsheniiu massovo-
politicheskoi raboty i material ¢no-bytovogo obsluzhivaniia rabochikh zavodov No. 22,
174 i 179,” 4 August 1945; ibid., ll. 11–12.
58I. M. Volkov , Trudovoi podvig sovetskogo krest ¢ianstva v poslevoennye gody: Kolkhozy SSSR
v 1946–1950 godakh (Moscow, 1972), 21.
59Ibid.
60V . F . Zima, Golod v SSSR 1946–1947 godov: Proiskhozhdenie i posledstviia (Moscow,
1996), 159.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
inhabitants of cities and industrial centers. If we judge by the letters 
that people wrote to government organs and to the newspapers, thestruggle against crime in many cities after the war turned into a strug-gle for survival. The workers of Saratov wrote to Pravda in fall 1945 that
“since the beginning of fall Saratov has been terrorized by thieves andmurderers. To be forced to undress on the street, to have watchessnatched from the wrist has become an everyday occurrence ....T h e
life of the city simply ceases as darkness approaches. The inhabitantshave grown accustomed to walking in the streets rather than on thesidewalks, and they watch suspiciously everyone who approachesthem.”
61“ A day doesn’t pass without someone in Saratov being mur-
dered or robbed, often in the very center of the city in broad daylight.. . . It’s gone so far that the only people who go to the theater or themovies are those who live next door [to the theater]. The Karl MarxTheater, located in the suburbs, is empty in the evenings.”
62The workers
of the Moscow suburb Podolsk shared the same problems.
Marauding bandits and thieves detain peaceful citizens . . . not only in the
evening, but kill, undress, and rob them in broad daylight, and not onlyin the obscure alleyways but on the main streets as well ...e v e n  around
the local party headquarters and the city soviet. After work, people gatherin groups in order to protect themselves on their way home. Thus meet-ings after work are poorly attended, because workers are afraid to remain,afraid of being attacked on the way home. And it is no longer safe athome, either, because robberies take place there day and night.
63
If it was unsafe to walk on the streets, it was equally unsafe to ride
commuter trains, where special bands of criminals operated. People notonly were afraid to remain for meetings after work but began to leavework before dark.
64Such behavior reﬂected both the reality of crime and
the spread of various kinds of rumors both in conversation as well as in spontaneously circulated leaﬂets describing alleged assaults andmurders.
65Some of these fears stemmed from elementary lack of infor-
mation about the real state of affairs, and the authorities made no effortto share such information.RUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 299
61Svodka pisem, postupivshikh v gazetu “Pravda” o banditizme, vorovstve i khuli-
ganstve, 17 November 1945 g.; RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 122, d. 118, l. 92.
62Ibid., ll. 92–3.
63Ibid., l. 93.
64Dokladnaia zapiska upolnomochennogo Komissii partiinogo kontrolia pri TsK VKP(b)
po Vladimirskoi oblasti Shkol’nikova “O neudovletvoritel ¢noi rabote organov militsii, suda
i prokuratury Vladimirskoi oblasti v bor ¢be s khuliganstvom, krazhami, grabezhami i
drugimi prestupleniiami,” 12 December 1945 g.; ibid., d. 103, l. 217.
65Ibid.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Statistical accounts of crime in the postwar years were incomplete
and contradictory and, as a rule, included all categories of crime classi-ﬁed by Soviet legislation as liable to prosecution. Thus people commit-ting minor offenses, those late to work or absent from work, werecounted along with the real criminals. The ﬁgures of the Ministry ofInternal Affairs are more accurate on the number of crimes investigatedby the police. In 1946 there were 430,071 such cases; in 1947,404,167; and in 1948, 191,720.
66The ﬁgures prepared in 1948 by the
Ministry of Internal Affairs on allcrimes differ somewhat from those
given above: 546,275 in 1946 and 453,165 in 1947.67By comparison,
in 1940 a total of 1,253,947 crimes were recorded.68Thus even if we
take into account the incomplete nature of the data, the postwar crimerate was on the whole signiﬁcantly lower than the prewar rate. Thepopular perception, however, indicates that the criminal activity wasconsiderably more serious than is suggested by the statistics. As weobserved above, the people’s fear of the criminal element stemmed not so much from reliable information as from the lack of it and thedependence on rumor instead. Robbery was in the circumstances morethan conventionally threatening, as it often cost people their last meagerpossessions. It was poverty that explained the scale of fear, just as itexplained the crime wave itself. This does not mean, of course, that theproblem of crime after the war existed only in people’s imaginations. Theauthorities also perceived it as one of their most serious problems, atleast during the ﬁrst two postwar years.
69As the population confronted
the problem, however, it began at once to recede. Hunger took its place.The hungry years, the worst of which were 1946 and 1947, scarcelyspared anyone. Even those who did not literally go hungry recall theseyears as the worst.
Further Reading: The Second World War and Postwar Years
John D. Barber and Mark Harrison, The Soviet Home Front 1941–1945: A Social
and Economic History of the USSR in W orld War II (London, 1991).
John Erickson, The Road to Stalingrad (London, 1975).300 ELENA ZUBKOVA
66Dokladnaia zapiska ministra vnutrennikh del SSSR S. Kruglova o sostoianii ugolovnoi
prestupnosti v SSSR v 1948 g., 18 January 1949; GARF , f. 9401, op. 2, d. 234, l. 20.
67Dokladnaia zapiska ministra vnutrennikh del SSSR S. Kruglova o sostoianii ugolovnoi
prestupnosti v SSSR za 1947 g., 4 February 1948; ibid., d. 199, l. 184.
68Ibid.
69Informatsiia Upravleniia po proverke partiinykh organov TsK VKP(b) “O faktakh
uvelicheniia prestupnosti i khuliganstva,” 10 February 1947; RTsKhIDNI, f. 17, op. 122,d. 289, ll. 1–6.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
John Erickson, The Road to Berlin (Boulder, Co., 1983).
Werner Hahn, Postwar Soviet Politics: The Fall of Zhdanov and the Defeat of
Moderation 1946–1953 (Ithaca, 1982).
Susan J. Linz, ed., The Impact of W orld War II on the Soviet Union (Totowa, NJ,
1985).
William O. McCagg, Stalin Embattled, 1943–1948 (Detroit, 1978).
William Moskoff, The Bread of Afﬂiction: The Food Supply in the USSR during W orld
War II (New York, 1990).
Mark von Hagen, “From ‘Great Fatherland War’ to the Second World War: New
Perspectives and Future Prospects,” in Ian Kershaw and Moshe Lewin, eds.,Stalinism and Nazism: Dictatorships in Comparison (New York, 1997).
Amir Weiner, Making Sense of War: The Second W orld War and the Fate of the 
Bolshevik Revolution (Princeton, 2001).
Alexander Werth, Russia at War , 1941–1945 (New York, 1964).
Alexander Werth, Russia: The Postwar Y ears (New York, 1971).RUSSIA AFTER THE WAR 301
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Abdulin, Mansur, 295
aberration thesis, 70, 77abortion, 214, 228–9Abramov , Fedor, 292accidental elements, 168acculturation process, 49, 137, 244,
266, 267, 270
activists
diaries, 195, 197, 200, 204exiled kulaks’ insurrectionary
organization, 90
female political, 230–1, 235housewife, 204military tribunals, 264Soviet, 145, 188–9, 265Ukrainian, 25, 264village and kolkhoz, 98, 197, 
200
administration seebureaucracy
adventure tales, 294–5afﬁrmative action, 172Aﬁnogenov , Aleksandr, 201agriculture seecollectivization;
kolkhoz peasantry
Allilueva, Nadezhda, 29amnesty legislation, 241, 250,
252–3, 263, 264–5
Andreevskii raion, 96anti-cosmopolitan campaign, 266
anti-insurgency campaigns, 140–1anti-semitism, 241, 265–8, 271anti-Soviet elements
archival information, 131, 154,
155
collaborators, 241, 242, 250–3,
262–5
German villages, 255Great Terror, 84, 88, 89–90, 91,
92, 93, 94, 99
kulaks, 256national minorities, 241, 242,
246–8, 255
NKVD investigation of criminal
contacts, 99
OGPU investigations, 25Politburo quotas, 84Politburo resolution (1937), 90,
146, 256
Trotskyist–Zinovievist center, 88
Antonov movement, 140, 143apparatchik, 32, 53(apparaty ) bureaucrats see
bureaucrats ( apparaty )
archives, 87, 153–5, 162, 190 n
Arendt, Hannah, 133 n, 148, 185 n,
245Index
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 303
Arkhangel’sk concentration camp,
144
Arkhangelskaia, Tatiana, 295army seeRed Army
Arrow Cross, 251artiﬁcial insemination technology ,
270
Astrakhan Province, 284authoritarianism, 20, 293
family policy , 225as legacy of Tsarist autocracy ,
66–7
long Russian history of, 121role of women, 231social structure as breeding
ground for, 4, 41, 56–61
autobiographical narratives, 182,
185–6, 186 n, 187–8, 207–8
see also diaries
autocracy , 54, 71–3, 77, 279, 292
Stalin’s personal, 16, 29, 30Tsarist legacy , 52, 66, 69
Avdeenko, Alexander, 292–3
Babel, Isaak, 186
“Back Streets” (Smirnov), 288backwardness, 69, 71, 73, 109, 121
and culture, 173–4heavy heritage of, 77peasant population, 4, 191rural economy , 57social origins of Stalinism, 4Stalinism’s unwillingness to
accept, 20
Stalinist terror, 129
Bahry , Donna, 18–19 n
Baker, Keith, 111 n
Baldwin, Peter, 121 n
banditism, 140–1Barkov , 90Barmin, A., 29Bauman, K. Ia., 23Bauman, Zygmunt, 244Bazarov , V ., 25Bebel, August, 150Belgium, 250, 253, 262, 263Belobrov , Andrei P ., 142–3Bendix, Reinhard, 50
Berezhnaia, Antonina, 208, 208 n
Beria, L. P ., 33, 34Berliner, Joseph, 168Bialer, Severyn, 33Birobidzhan, 268birth-rate, 213, 214, 218, 224,
228–9
Blackbourn, David, 120 n
blood pedigree theory , 273blue Danubes, 288, 289Bolsheviks, 2 n
building socialism, 122, 123cataloguing of individuals, 153class analysis, 43coercive road to socialism, 68culture, 29, 266discontinuity with Stalinism, 3, 
15
eschatology , 146, 244failure of, 59Green Army uprising, 114 n
seizure of power, 2–3, 39, 85source of Stalin’s policies, 71Stalin’s deviation from, 15Stalin’s executions of, 15state violence, 133–4, 135, 138,
141, 147, 155
subjectivization policy , 186support of soldiers, 3support of workers, 3, 39transformation of, 50use of the term “terror,” 147women’s liberation and equality ,
213–14
see also Communist Party; October
Revolution (1917)
Bonapartist dictatorship, 111Borovets, Maksim, 261Bourdieu, Pierre, 123 n
bourgeois elements, 182bourgeois order, 203bourgeois privacy , 203bourgeois specialists, 170bourgeois values, 28, 239bourgeoisie, 112, 115, 120, 120 n,
136, 269
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
304 INDEX
boyar aristocracy , 72
brigade diaries, 189 n
Britain, 85Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 30Bukharin, Nikolai, 20, 68
alliance with Stalin, 26as alternative to Stalin, 116 n
fall of, 21Great Offensive, 75, 103growing into socialism, 74incomplete socialism, 77Leninism, 116medieval principle, 55Stalin’s climb to dictatorship, 70Stalin’s unhappiness, 31–2state violence, 131–2statistical bureaus, 150trust in Stalin, 29 n
Bulat, 98Bul’ba, 261Bulgakov , Mikhail, 168bureaucracy
anti-Soviet conspiracy stories, 25arbitrariness of, 164expansion of, 46, 50, 53, 115heavy heritage of, 77in loco parentis , 174
need for stability and discipline,
227
need for tenure, 54as a principle of foreign
domination, 148
security of, 29sovereignty , 54Stalin’s dominance of, 116support for Stalin, 3, 3–4 n
supremacy of, 57Tsarist Russia, 130–1
bureaucrats ( apparaty ), 49, 169
defence of the people from, 100as detrimental social force, 40diaries, 190 n
growth of, 46military statistics, 136purges, 32, 40, 53, 54
byt(everyday life), 192–4, 194 ncadres revolution, 100
capitalism
class analysis, 43, 58class exploitation, 271enemies of socialism, 241growing role of state, 44kulaks, 46–7, 74Marx’s violent revolution, 109muzhik , 45
Party’s ideological distrust of, 74Riutin group, 23 n
socialism’s assault on, 78suppression of fundamental
elements of, 67, 77
Trotsky’s warnings on restoration
of, 102
Tsarist Russia, 57United States, 65
capitalist encirclement, 21, 85, 115,
252
card indexes/ﬁles, 153–5Carr, E. H., 44, 117 n, 122 n
Carrel, Alexis, 269–70censuses, 118, 118 n, 131, 149, 240
Central Committee
anti-Soviet reports, 25attitude toward peasantry , 22employment of women, 219Great Terror, 88, 90–1, 92, 93,
96, 103
inspection of coal-mining industry ,
296
Khrushchev’s election to, 76kulaks as principal anti-Soviet
element, 256
post-war living and working
conditions, 282, 296, 297, 298
registration of ethnic Germans,
255
Trotskyist–Zinovievists, 88Ukrainian nationalists, 265
Central Control Commission, 23 n, 25
Central State Archive, 153, 154ceremonies, 51Certeau, Michel de, 124–5 n
Chesnokov , Dmitrii, 248
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 305
child care, 167, 214, 217, 219, 221,
224, 226
childbirth, 122, 167childraising, 108, 213, 214, 230children
births in post-war Soviet Union,
281
during Second World War, 281–2education, 227granting of passports, 98homeless, 214orphaned, 114, 282removal from negligent parents,
108
socialization of, 217teenagers’ working conditions,
282
China, 186 n
Chinese Cultural Revolution, 273Christian Church, 50church history , 50Churchill, Winston, 73Civil War
Don Cossacks, 254effect on economic and social
structures, 40
foreign threat, 85passportization, 150revolutionary utopianism, 113violence, 131, 137, 138–9
clan diaries, 189 n
Clark, Katerina, 109 n
class analysis, 43–4, 46, 58, 148class antagonisms, 170, 255class divisions, 108, 112class struggle, 21, 254
diaries, 191, 192
Cold War, 65, 291collective victimization, 171collectivization
aims of, 59–60as clash between state and
peasantry , 45–9, 59–60
at end of Second World War, 298consequences of, 161depeasantizing policy , 59–60diaries, 191–2, 196–7
ethnic minorities, 254explanations of, 2forced pace of, 68, 86open resistance to, 21, 162as particular feature of Stalinism,
2, 27, 74, 86, 225–6
peasant migration, 40, 47–8, 224radical revisionists, 4as “revolution from below,” 4, 18and women’s roles, 216–17, 218
colonial techniques, 148commemoration, hierarchies of, 249Commission for Legal Matters, 95Commodus, Emperor, 70communal apartments, 176, 217,
288
communal institutions, 214, 217,
221–2, 224–5, 231
Communist Party , 2 n
belief in Marxian socialism, 67building of socialism, 74–7class war to the death, 73culture, 14employment of women, 219growth of, 216, 216 n
Jewish membership, 241lack of constraints on ambitions
of, 130
national elites, 240NEP , 115population’s resentment of, 163,
170
revisionism, 3self-presentation, 187Stalin’s control of, 3, 14Tenth Party Congress (1921),
114, 114 n
terror, 2, 13, 40, 83, 88–90, 93,
99–100, 147, 147 n
see also Bolsheviks; Politburo
concentration camps, 56, 129,
141–2, 143–4, 245
Condorcet, 111, 111 n
Cossacks, de-Cossackization, 131,
139
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
306 INDEX
crime, growth of, 298–300
Crimean peninsula, 141Crimean Tatars, 241cultural conservatism, 15cultural history , 1, 4, 109 n
cultural revolution, 26, 28, 221cultural traditionalism, 26, 226culture, 5, 59, 173–4, 226
Church’s ﬁght against, 50commodiﬁcation of, 109 n
culture, Bolshevik, 29, 266culture, Communist Party , 14culture, peasant, 47culture, political, 1, 20–1, 226culture, traditional folk, 109 n
Czechoslovakia, 253
Dan, Fedor, 29 n, 31
Dan, Lydia, 31Dashnaks, 91Davies, Joseph E., 102Davies, Robert, 6–7de-Cossackization, 131, 139Decembrists, 285, 286deculturation, 49, 56, 59dekulakization, 21, 48, 97, 101,
133, 145–6, 154
democracy , 41, 58, 59, 103, 112,
120, 293
democratic states
growing role of the state, 44,
182 n
Western liberal, 5 n, 182 n
demography , 280–1demonstrations, 279, 298deportations, 2, 27, 129–30
Armenians, 33Balts, 136–7children, 281Crimean Tatars, 241ethnic minorities, 33, 92, 131,
161, 240, 241, 249, 253,254–5, 257, 258–9, 262
from western borderlands during
First World War, 136–7
Germans, 92, 131, 136–7, 249,
255, 257Jews, 131, 249, 267
Koreans, 92kulaks, 145–6, 165, 254–5peasants, 161, 165Poles, 249, 254, 257Ukrainian nationalists, 241, 262
Destruction Battalions, 263determinism, modernization theory ,
5n
Deutscher, Isaac, 85, 102–3diaries, 6, 166–7, 182–3, 184, 185,
186 n, 188–91, 188 n, 189 n,
190 n
as chronicles of socialist
construction, 191–8, 193 n,
194 n, 196 n, 197 n
introspective and self-
transformative functions of,198–203
public and private spheres, 202–7,
205 n
dignity , 186divorce, 232Djilas, Milovan, 259–60Doctors’ Plot (1953), 33, 241, 247,
267
domestic violence, 174, 189–90Don region, 139, 140, 254drunkenness, 167, 174Duma, 71
Economic Problems of Socialism in the
USSR , 246
edinonachalie , 53
education, 18, 175, 227
abolition of coeducation, 231–2sense of self, 182, 187women, 217, 219, 224, 226
Eikhe, R. I., 89, 90election campaigns, 18elite politics, 39Enchmen, Emmanuil, 149–50enemies of the people, 40, 55, 152,
154, 167, 189
Engels, Friedrich, 112–13, 200, 269Enlightenment, 108, 108 n, 111,
112, 113, 118–19, 122
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 307
equality , 1, 67, 77, 111
women, 213–14, 215, 230–5
Erenburg, Ilia, 189 n
ethnic minorities, 6, 131, 239–41,
253–9
deportation by Stalin, 33, 92, 131,
161, 240, 241, 249, 253,254–5, 257, 258–9, 262
forced deportation during First
World War, 136–7
see also Jewish minority; Ukrainian
nationalist movement
ethnic particularism, 241, 253, 272ethnocentrism, 5 n, 23
eugenics, 134, 245, 249, 269, 270European Court, 253euthanasia, 249, 269, 270Ezhov , N. I., 31, 31 n, 88, 94, 95, 96,
103
factory history project, 182
fairy tales, 294–5family
attempts to abolish, 213, 214promotion of importance of, 214,
227–31
socializing functions of, 230weakening of, 213–14
Family Edict (1944), 232family life, 204family policies, 213–14, 218,
225–35
family values, 19famine (1932–3), 161fatalism, 162, 164fatherhood, 230Fedotov , Georgii, 117 n, 292, 293
ﬁfth columns, 85, 99, 102, 103, 
247
Le Figaro , 268
ﬁltration process, 142–3, 153First World War, 165
collaborators, 250deportations from western
borderlands, 136–7
state violence, 130, 131, 135,
136–8Fitzpatrick, Sheila, 4, 30–1, 
161–77
Five-Year Plans, 20, 27, 78, 102,
168, 198
unemployment, 218 n
and women’s roles, 216–17, 218,
219, 220, 221, 224
food supply , 296Foucault, Michel, 124–5, 124 n
Fourier, Charles, 113France, 85, 251, 252, 263, 264French Revolution, 108, 111–12,
120, 135
Freud, Sigmund, 272Frinovskii, M. P ., 91Fritzsche, Peter, 134Frye, Northrop, 119 n
Galin, Boris, 294
Galton, Francis, 152Gan, 267gardening state, 188, 244, 245–6,
248, 255, 272
Garros, Véronique, 184 n
Gefter, Mikhail, 285, 293Geldern, James van, 28gender roles, 6, 213–15
see also women
Genghis Khan, 68, 69genocide, 271–2Genocide Convention, 271Georgian Mensheviks, 91Germany , 27, 86
see also Nazi Germany
Getty , J. Arch, 30, 84Goebbels, Joseph, 265The Golden Calf , 169
Good Soldier Schweik , 169
Gorbachev , Mikhail, 66, 70 n, 77
Gorkii Oblast, 282Gorky , Maxim, 201, 268gosudarstvennost ’, 53
grain requisitions, 2, 96, 97,
113–14, 161, 163
Great Break, 68, 73–4, 115Great Retreat, 26Groman, V . G., 25
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
308 INDEX
Grossman, Vasilii, 266
gulag prison camps, 1, 118 n, 182,
187, 257
Halﬁn, Igal, 184 n
Hannerz, Ulf, 119 n
Harbintsy , 92Harvard Project interviews, 18–19 n,
164, 167, 170, 171
Hasek, Jaroslav , 169health passports, 150Hegel, Georg W . F ., 75, 112Hellbeck, Jochen, 181–209heredity , 266, 269, 271hidden transcripts, 184historical agency , 181–2History , end of, 245Hitler, Adolf, 27, 33, 33 n, 69, 85,
261, 277
Hobsbawm, Eric, 43Hoffmann, David, 184 n
Holocaust, 270Holquist, Peter, 129–56, 184 n
homeless children, 214Homo Sovieticus , 169, 174, 175, 
176
homosexuality , 228housewife activists, 204housework, 221–2, 229humanistic discourse, 186Hungary , 251hunger, 163, 279, 281, 300
Iakir, Iona, 24
Iakovlev , Ia. A., 25identity , national, 239–40ideology
diaries, 199–200and violence, 260see also socialist ideology
Ilf, I., 169illegitimacy , 232imperialism, 148Inber, Vera, 199, 202–3individualism, 109 n, 182 n, 282
industrial managers, 168Industrial Revolution, 120industrialization
autobiographical domain, 182,
188
diaries, 191factory history project, 182forced pace of, 68, 86modernization theory , 5 n
opposition to, 21as particular feature of Stalinism,
2, 18, 60, 74, 86, 225–6
peasant migration, 40, 47–8radical revisionists, 4“revolution from below,” 4, 18and women, 213, 214, 217,
218–25, 226
inﬂation, 223informers, 167, 175, 176Institute of Medical Genetics, 270intelligentsia, 30 n, 32, 166, 168,
170, 171
internationalism, 15, 19invalids, 284–5, 291Irkutsk province, 283–4iron curtain, 291Iudaizm bez prikras (Kychko), 268
Ivan the Terrible, 16, 52, 67, 69,
71–3
Izvestiia , 248
Japan, 85
Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee, 267Jewish minority , 241, 249, 265–8,
271
Kagan, 267
Kaganovich, Lazar, 24, 25, 31, 33,
34, 76, 96, 103, 241, 271
Kaganovich, Mikhail, 27Kalinin, Mikhail I., 25, 98, 192–3,
296
Kamenev , Lev B., 88, 116 n
Kaminskii, G., 23Karaganda, 118Katsenelson, Ilia, 267Kazakevich, Emmanuil, 286–7, 289,
294
Kazakh nationalism, 19–20
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 309
Ketlinskaia, Vera, 287
KGB archives, 87, 265Khlevnyuk, Oleg, 83–104khoziaistvenniki , 25
Khrushchev , Nikita, 54, 60, 76, 95
Jewish minority , 267–8Stalin’s trust, 34Ukrainian nationalists, 261
Kirov , Sergei, 21, 23 n, 24, 29, 30
kolkhoz peasantry , 27 n, 46, 47, 48,
60, 75, 169–70
denial of governmental awards,
264
deportations, 257diaries, 191–2, 193, 197, 200Great Terror, 98, 100–1migration to cities, 223
Kollontai, Aleksandra, 213, 231Kolomenskyi locomotive building
works, 89
Komsomol, 187Komsomolsk-na-Amure, 118Kondrat’ev , N. D., 25Kondratiev , Viacheslav , 287Korenevskaya, Natalya, 184 n
Kornai, Janos, 174Korotchenko, D. S., 96Kosior, S. V ., 23Kosterina, Nina, 167Kotkin, Stephen, 107–26krai committees, 89, 90, 91–2Krasnaya nov’ , 51
Krasnoe Sormovo, 89Krasnoyarsk obkom, 96Kratkii kurs , 34
Krokodil , 267
krupnyi gosudarstvennyi deyatel’ , 53
Krupskaia, Nadezhda, 231Krylenko, Nikolai V ., 98Kuban Cossacks , 295
Kubanskie kazaki , 295
kulaks, 115, 117, 165, 254–5
capitalism, 46–7, 74deportations, 145–6, 165, 254–5diaries, 191–2elimination as a class, 46–7military service, 257–8Party’s ideological distrust of, 74
passportization, 150as principal anti-Soviet element,
256
rehabilitation of, 256, 257–8Riutin group, 23 n
secret bureau registration, 151terror, 84, 89, 90–1, 94, 97, 99,
145
see also dekulakization
Kursk oblast, 101Kuznetsk, 296Kychko, Trohym, 268
labor books, 150
labor camps, 48, 131, 231Lahusen, Thomas, 184 n
Lapidus, Gail Warshofsky , 6, 213–36Laue, Theodore von, 86leadership cults, 18Lenin Mounted Brigade, 262–3Lenin, Vladimir, 2 n, 13, 51, 57, 75,
114, 117
abolition of family , 214comparison to Stalin, 20, 68, 172death of, 116democratic solutions, 58housework, 229nationality policy , 239noble origins, 269Stalin’s deviation from, 14, 15, 19as Stalin’s ideological reference, 71Stalin’s rudeness, 73
Leningrad Affair (1947), 33Leninism, 42, 52, 53, 116–17, 116 n
Lewin, Moshe, 17, 26, 29–30, 32,
39–61, 65, 185 n, 217
liberal discourse, 204liberalism, 111libraries, 294Lieutenant Kizhe , 169
Life and Fate (Grossman), 266
Lipman-Blumen, Jean, 231 n
literary intelligentsia, 168Livonian war, 72Livshits, 267Livshits, Iakov , 269
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
310 INDEX
Lominadze, Vissarion, 22, 22 n
lynch trials, 271–2Lysenkoism, 270
Madison, Bernice, 121–2 n
Magnitogorsk, 75, 110, 118–19,
118 n, 122, 146
Makarenko, Anton, 230Malenkov , G. M., 31, 33, 34, 88–9,
93
Malia, Martin, 4, 65–79Mal’tseva, M. D., 101Manchuria, 85Mankov , Arkadii, 166–7, 193–4,
194 n
marriage
promotion of importance of, 214,
227–8, 230, 232, 233
rejection as support for women,
234–5
Marx, Karl, 108–9, 112, 113, 200,
269
Marx–Engels–Lenin Institute, 116 n
Marxism, 2 n, 53
demise of, 66enemies of socialism, 241and nationality , 240scientiﬁc claims, 113social historians, 65–6as a sociological science, 269Stalin cult, 52as Stalin’s ideological reference, 71
Mayer, Arno J., 120 n
Mechanical Engineering , 206
medical knowledge, 107Medvedev , Dmitrii, 260–1Medvedev , Roy , 77memoirs, 189mentally retarded, 269middle class, 28Mikoyan, A. I., 24, 31, 33, 34, 296military service, 214, 224, 231military statistics, 136, 137Ministry of Internal Affairs, 300Mironov , 90Mirzoian, Levon, 19–20modernization theory , 5 nMolodtsov , Vladimir, 197 n, 199–200
Molotov Factory , 282Molotov , Viacheslav , 31, 33, 145,
296
anti-Soviet elements, 25Great Terror, 85, 89, 96, 103industrial targets, 24Stalin turns against, 34Stalin’s private letters, 24
Moscow, 118 n, 299
Moscow Ball Bearing Works, 89Moscow Cheka, 142moshchi , 51
motherhood, 213, 214, 228, 232Muller, Hermann, 270Mumford, Lewis, 119 n
Muslim Communists, 19Mussavats, 91
nachal’stvo , 49
Napoleon, 278Narkomyust, 93, 98narodnost’ , 52
national minorities seeethnic
minorities
National Socialism, 134
see also Nazi Germany
national-uklonizm (national
deviationism), 19
nationalism, 19–20, 21, 52, 148,
239–40
nationality policy , 6, 19–20, 23–4,
239–40, 248, 253
see also ethnic minorities
nationalization, 47, 53, 58–9, 114,
226
nature, tension with nurture, 241–2,
243–74
Nazi Germany , 5 n, 15, 244
biological/racial paradigms, 134,
244
clan diaries, 189 n
collective diaries, 189 n
euthanasia, 270Hitler’s control of army , 33 n
invasion of Soviet Union, 277military build-up, 85
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 311
non-aggression pact with Soviet
Union, 16
racial-biological enterprise, 249
Nekrasov , Viktor, 292neo-traditionalism, 109 n
Nepmen, 115Netherlands, 250, 262New Economic Policy (NEP), 114,
114 n, 115, 115 n
comparison to post-NEP situation,
171, 172
ending of, 17peace and stability of, 17remembered with nostalgia, 60state violence, 144
New England, 188 n
Nicholas II, Tsar, 85, 103Nikolaev , Leonid, 189 n
Nikolskii, B. I., 118 n
Nizhnyi Lomov , 296NKVD, 243
archival system, 154, 155diaries, 189Great Terror, 84, 87, 88, 90, 91,
92, 94, 95, 96, 97, 99, 146–7
nationalist conspiratorial groups,
19
prosecution of kulaks, 258public opinion, 171–2secret reports and interrogations,
184
Ukrainian nationalists, 262
NKVD Military Tribunals, 263Norway , 251Novokuznetsk, 118nurture, tension with nature, 241–2,
243–74
oblast committees, 90, 91–2
“Obshchestvennitsa,” 204October Revolution (1917)
autobiographical domain, 185–6,
188, 207
Bolshevik seizure of power, 2–3,
39, 85
and Enlightenment, 112exclusion of Jews, 268promises of, 1
revisionists, 3, 39, 66role of soldiers, 3role of workers, 3, 39sense of self, 185–6, 185 n
Odessa oblast, 101OGPU, 19, 25, 145, 151, 154Omsk, 297–8one-man management, 53Oprichnina, 52, 72Orel province, 142Organization of Ukrainian
Nationalists (OUN), 262, 264,265
Organizational Bureau of the Central
Committee, 255
Orgburo, 255Orjonikidze, Sergo, 24, 25, 75otvetrabotnik , 53
Out of the Night (Muller), 270
Ovechkin, Valentin, 252Owen, Robert, 113
paganism, 50
Parallel Anti-Soviet Trotskyist
Centre, 88
Parsonian sociology , 234passportization, 131, 149–53, 223,
240, 257
paternalism, 174paternity suits, 232patriarchal authoritarianism, 4patriarchy , 20patriotism, 20, 33, 173, 175Paul I, 70Peasant Brest-Litovsk policy , 113–14peasant patriarchalism, 4peasants
backwardness of, 4, 191central institutions attitude
toward, 22
concessions to, 27depeasantizing policy , 59–60deportations, 161, 165Green Army uprising against
Bolsheviks, 114 n
legal regimen, 27 n
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
312 INDEX
peasants cont.
migration to cities, 40, 47–8, 223open resistance to collectivization,
21, 162
pivotal role, 45–9“revolution from below,” 18serfdom, 71, 72social mobility , 18see also kolkhoz peasantry;
smychka
pensions, 109, 121 n, 122
Penza Province, 296People’s Commissariat of Labor, 
220
People’s Commissariat of Military
Censorship, 297
People’s Commissariat of Trade, 
296
Peregudov , A. V ., 195–6, 196 n
Peter the Great, 52, 60, 67, 69, 
71–3
Peter III, 70petit bourgeois, 46, 50, 73Petliura, Symon, 268Petrograd Naval Academy , 142Petrov , L., 169petty-bourgeois egalitarianism, 
226
Peukert, Detlev , 139physiological passports, 149Piatakov , Iurii, 75Piatnitskaia, Iuliia, 206–7Plaggenborg, Stefan, 185 n
Platonov , Andrei, 186Podlubnyi, Stepan, 150–1, 166, 200,
201, 202, 203, 205–6
Podolsk, 299Pokrovskii, Mikhail N., 153Poland, 251police, 25, 32, 125
Oprichnina, 52, 72state violence, 83, 131, 163, 171Sultan-Galiev counter-
revolutionary organization, 19
see also NKVD
Polish Organisation of Military
Personnel, 92Politburo
attitude toward peasantry , 22deportation of ethnic minorities,
254–5
Great Terror, 84, 87, 88, 89–90,
92–3, 94, 95–6, 98, 100–1,146, 147, 256
political agitation, 182, 187political initiative, 184political liberalization, 279political rituals, 18Popok, 89post-revisionism, 4–5, 181–2post-war literature, 233–4Potemkin, Leonid, 199, 208praktiki , 30 n
Pravda , 227–8, 289, 299
Preobrazhenskii, E. A., 75Presidential archives, 87private property rights, 182 n
private spheres, 184, 202–7privilege, 25, 50, 165, 169, 170
bureaucrats, 40, 52, 53, 54resentments against, 32
progressive modernity , 109, 121Prokoﬁev , Serge, 169propaganda, 16, 18, 49, 171, 184
equal opportunities for women,
213–14
fascist, 248gender roles, 214–15open trials, 92sense of self, 182victory over Nazism, 33women’s reproductive obligations,
214
see also Stalin cult
prostitution, 214, 228Prussia, 72pseudonyms, 266–7psycho-biograms, 150psychoanalysis, 182 n
psychology , diaries, 199–200public celebrations, 18public opinion, 171–2public services, 224–5public spheres, 202–7
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 313
purges
bureaucrats/Party ofﬁcials, 32, 40,
53, 54, 83, 84, 147
collaborators, 241, 242, 250–3,
262–5
radical revisionists, 4Stalin’s personal role in, 14, 15,
30–2, 84
see also puriﬁcation drive; terror
puriﬁcation drive, 6, 129, 206, 241,
243
collaborators, 241, 242, 250–3,
262–5
evolution of, 245Jewish minority , 241, 249, 265–8,
271
radicalization of policies, 244speciﬁc sites of, 249Ukrainian nationalist movement,
241, 249–50, 260–5
Puritanism, 187 n, 188 n
Pushkin centennial, 18Puzanov , Tikhon, 196–7
questionnaires, 131, 149, 152
quicksand society , 185 n, 217
Rabinow, Paul, 119 n, 120 n
race, as a principle of the body
politic, 148
Ramzin, L. K., 25Red Army , 22, 115, 141, 173, 175
arrests in leadership, 90defeat of Green Army , 114 n
ethnic minorities, 257, 258prosecution/execution of
partisans, 263
psychological pressure, 284veterans, 278–9, 283–91, 294
Red Army notebook, 188Red Chemist factory , 284Red militarism, 24Reingol’d, I. I., 139religion, 50–1religious confession, 182 n
republicanism, 111resistances, 124, 125 nresocialization, 250
revisionism, 3–4, 39, 65–6, 83–4
bourgeoisie, 120 n
resistance to Stalinism, 162sense of self, 181
The Revolution Betrayed (Trotsky), 227
revolutionary politics, 108, 111–12,
184, 185
revolutions seeFrench Revolution;
October Revolution (1917)
Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 29risk communities, 121 n
risk-taking, 162, 167–8Rittersporn, Gabor, 84rituals, 51Riutin, Martem’ian Ivanovich, 23,
23n, 76
Riutin Platform and Appeal, 22Romantic anticapitalism, 109 n
Russian Revolution seeOctober
Revolution (1917)
Rychkov , 143–4
samoderzhavie , 52
Sanov , Lazar Samilovich, 267Saratov , 299science, 111, 130–1, 135–6scientiﬁc elite, 111 n
scientiﬁc socialism, 113Scott, James, 184, 184 n
Scott, John, 192Scott, Masha, 192Second World War, 249–53, 257–9,
277–9, 280–301
children, 281–2collaborators, 241, 242, 250–3,
262–5
invalids, 284–5, 291Soviet casualties, 277, 280–1Soviet material losses, 280veterans, 278–9, 283–91, 294women’s role, 220–1, 224, 231
sects, 50self
sense of, 181–3, 184–91, 207–8see also diaries
self-constitution, 187 n
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
314 INDEX
self-improvement, 181
self-interest, 181self-reﬂection, 183Serdyuk, Z. T ., 95Serebriakov , Leonid, 269Serikov , V . P ., 295sexual deviance, 228sexual morality , 232Shaginian, Marietta, 202–3Shakhty affair, 76, 170–1Shaporin, Iurii, 166Shaporina, Liubov , 166Shchekinsk District, 296shelter society , 282Shiryaevskii raion, 101Shklovsky , V ., 134, 135Shnaider, Boguslav , 284shock brigades, 246Sholokov , Mikhail, 22, 103 n
Short Course , 256
show trials, 18, 40, 55, 92–3, 94,
101
Shtange, Galina, 167, 194, 204–5Shtrom, Vera, 198Siberia, 18, 296
anti-Soviet elements, 89, 90evacuation during war, 278, 279living conditions, 297–8national minorities deported to,
163
tax-in-kind, 114 n
Sich, Ivan, 194 n
Simonov , Konstantin, 294skepticism, 168–9Skrypnyk, Mykola, 23Slater, Philip, 232Smirnov , Tolmachev , and Eismont
opposition, 22
Smirnov , Viktor, 288Smulson, Lazar, 267smuta , 72
smychka , 17, 19
social activation, 186 n
social cataloguing, 5, 129, 131, 136,
148–55
social conservatism, 26, 225social dislocation, 217, 225social emancipation, 186, 207
social engineering, 45, 244–5, 253,
254
social history , 1, 4, 39, 42, 65–6social insurance, 122social intervention, 5, 107–8, 125 n,
129–30, 135
social mobility , 18, 48, 221 n, 225
social order, 108, 111, 112social origins, 1, 3, 39–61social problems, 214social realm, 125 n, 135–6
social regulation, 120social science, 107, 135social stabilization, 214social statistics, 107, 129, 130–1,
136, 137
social structure, 40, 44, 45
and authoritarianism, 56–61
social transformation, 2, 18, 108,
129, 217, 225
socialism, building of, 74–7, 115,
122, 123, 131, 163
diaries, 182–3, 194Magnitogorsk as encapsulation of,
118
sabotaging of, 21sense of self, 182, 186tied to imperial Russian history ,
117
socialist ideology , 1, 65–79
condemnation of, 2Engels, 112–13Marx, 112, 113range of political thought, 2 n
role of, 2–4
society , scientiﬁc conception of, 111,
130–1, 135–6
soldiers, 3
see also Red Army
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr, 145, 172Soviet Union
collapse of, 65–6foreign threat, 85–6, 102–3inﬂuence on western world, 122 n
non-aggression pact with Nazi
Germany , 16
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 315
post-war, 277–301
Sovnarkom USSR, 98–9, 98 n
Sovnarkom-Central Committee, 94spontaneity , 96–7, 168spravki , 88–9, 98
SRs, 91Stakhanovites, 163, 164, 172stakhanovtsy , 27
Stalin cult, 15, 20, 40, 52, 69, 172Stalin, Joseph
abolition of family , 214bid for absolute power, 117 n
building hegemony in the 1930s,
17–21
characterizations of, 13–15, 20,
24–5, 29–30, 66, 68–70, 73
claim to have established
socialism, 2 n, 21, 109
class struggle, 254comparison to Lenin, 20, 68, 172as conservative revolutionary ,
26–30
control of Communist Party , 3, 14creation of state-run economy , 17denunciations of, 162during Second World War, 32–3eugenics, 270family policy , 214foreign threat, 85, 102–3higher stages of communism, 246as highest form of subjectivity ,
188 n
ideological references, 71invocation of past Tsars, 117 n
left opposition, 117 n
Leninism, 116–17, 116 n
martial qualities of Slavs, Germans
and Jews, 266
nationality policy , 239, 248new type of internal enemy , 247opposition to, 21–6origins of Second World War, 252origins of Stalinism, 1, 13–35,
68–70
“proposition of the screws,”
290–1
revisionism, 3revolution from above, 18, 69, 71,
72, 117 n, 225
right to appeal guidelines, 268–9rise to power, 13–14shifting positions, 14socialist ideology , 66–7, 71, 72–3,
75
support from Soviet bureaucracy ,
3, 3–4 n
and the term “Trotskyism,” 116 n
terror and autocracy , 13, 16,
30–2, 55, 68–9, 71–3, 83,84–6, 95–6, 161–2, 268–9
victory in Second World War,
289–90, 292–3
war casualties, 280Wrangelite ofﬁcer corps, 141
Stalingrad, 277Stalinism
consequences of, 5–6deﬁnition of, 2origins of, 1–5particular features of, 2resistance to, 4, 6, 162–3, 169,
181
revisionism, 3–4, 39Stalin’s personal blame for, 1,
13–35, 68–70
widespread opposition, 6
Stalinsk, 118Starr, S. Frederick, 221 n
Stasova, Elena, 231state
dominant role of, 44growth of, 17interplay with society , 40, 44, 56limits of power, 17–18revisionists, 3, 39revolution from above, 18self-interested subjects, 182 n
see also bureaucracy
State Defense Committee, 257state exploitation, 172state intervention, 5, 107–8, 125 n,
129–30, 135
State Military Archive, 154state ownership, 54
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
316 INDEX
state violence seepurges; puriﬁcation
drive; terror
state welfare seewelfare state
state-run economy , 2, 15, 17, 109statehood, 53statization, 56, 58, 59Stebun, Ilia Isaakovich, 267sterilization, 130, 269Stolypin, P ., 45subjectivity , 110, 124, 181–3,
184–91, 207–8
see also diaries
Sukhanov , N. N., 25Sultan-Galiev , M. Kh., 19Suny , Ronald Grigor, 13–35, 65Syrtsov–Lominadze Right–Left Bloc,
22, 22 n
Tambov province, 140, 143–4
Tamerlane, 68tavern ( shalmannaia ) democracy , 288
tax-in-kind, 113–14, 114 n
technical intelligentsia, 26terror
arbitrariness of, 164ideology , 54–6objectives of Great Terror, 83–104,
133, 146–7, 155, 252, 256,268–9
Stalin’s personal role in, 13, 16,
30–2, 55, 68–9, 83, 84–6,95–6, 161–2, 268–9
state violence as prophylactics,
138–47
state violence as technique, 5,
129–56
see also purges; puriﬁcation drive
Tiumen, 284Tocqueville, Alexis de, 135totalitarian model of government,
2–3, 5 n, 83, 162, 181
Tovstukha, I. P ., 20 n
Trainin, Aron, 271–2Transcaucasian federation, 22travel diaries, 196troiki, 90, 91–2, 94, 95Trotskyists, Great Terror, 88Trotsky , Lev , 13, 20, 68, 77
as alternative to Stalin, 116 n
campaign against Stalin’s
“mistakes,” 76
family policy , 227Leninism, 116warnings of a prolonged war, 102,
102 n
Wrangelite ofﬁcer corps, 141
Trotskyism, 116 n
Tsarist Russia, 43, 49
capitalist sector, 57scientiﬁc conception of society ,
130–1, 135–6
state violence, 136–7universal service, 71–2
TsIK USSR, 98Tucker, Robert, 117 n
Tukhachevskii, Mikhail, 24Tula Province, 296Turkmeniya troika, 96Tvardovski, Aleksandr, 169Twelve Chairs , 169
udarniki , 27
Ukrainian Central Committee, 254Ukrainian Communist Party , 23, 
265
Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UP A),
262, 264, 265
Ukrainian nationalist movement,
241, 249–50, 260–5
Ulam, Adam, 171Ul’ianov , Anatolii, 194–5, 198–9,
200–1
unemployment, 108, 114, 122, 218,
218 n, 219
Union of Marxist–Leninists, 23United Nations, 271United States, 85unpredictability , 162, 165Urals, 297–8uravnilovka , 26
urbanization, 5 n, 118–20, 118 n,
217, 223
utopian socialism, 113, 243, 245–6utopianism, 221, 221 n, 222–3
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
INDEX 317
vanguard concept, 174
Vareikis, I. M., 23Vasilii Terkin , 169
Veresaev , V ., 51veterans, 278–9, 283–91, 294victimization, 171vintiki , 17
Vishnevskii, Vsevolod, 196Vladimir Province, 284Vogeler, Heinrich, 201–2Volga Germans, 258Voroshilov , K., 24, 33, 34, 96vydvizhentsy , 30 n
Vyshinskii, A. Ya., 25, 93, 101
wages, 26, 27, 223, 226
Ward, Chris, 14Weber, Max, 50Weiner, Amir, 6, 239–74welfare state, 5, 107–8, 109, 
120–2, 121–2 n, 125 n, 126,
130, 174
White movement, 91, 103, 131,
138, 141, 142
will, diaries, 199–200women, 6, 19, 213–36
collectivization, 216–17, 218education, 217, 219, 224, 226Five-Year Plans, 216–17, 218,
219, 220, 221, 224
industrialization, 213, 214, 217,
218–25, 226
liberation and equality , 213–14,
215, 230–5
natural role as mothers, 213post-war Soviet Union, 281redeﬁnition of roles, 225–35reproductive obligations, 213,
214, 228–9
unemployment, 218, 218 n
women’s movement, 204worker resistance, 172workers
demonstrations, 279, 298diaries, 193, 194 n
evacuation of, 277–8, 279living conditions, 296, 297needs and demands of, 17remuneration system, 27“revolution from below,” 18role in October Revolution, 3, 39social mobility , 18strike action, 162support for Bolsheviks, 3, 39wish to return home after
evacuation, 297–8
women, 213, 214, 217, 218–25,
226
working conditions, 296see also smychka
Workers and Peasants Inspection of
the RSFSR, 221
working class, 46, 113, 118, 121,
170, 172
World War I seeFirst World War
World War II seeSecond World War
Wrangelite ofﬁcer corps, 141Wright, Gwendolyn, 119 n
Yagoda, G. G., 88, 90
Yugoslavia, 253
Zambrowski, Roman, 267
“Zaulki” (Smirnov), 288zemstvos , 71
Zhadanov , 267Zhdanov , A., 31Zhelenzniakov , Aleksandr, 197–8,
200
Zhmerynka, 267Zhuravlev , Nikolai, 192–3Zinoviev , Grigorii, 20, 88Zinovievists, Great Terror, 88Zubkova, Elena, 6, 277–301
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by Dartmouth College Library (EAL), Wiley Online Library on [07/05/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
