The Prince
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   1 21/05/15   3:00 PM9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   2 21/05/15   3:00 PMThe Prince
Niccolò  
Machiavelli
Translated and Introduced by
tim parks
PENGUIN CLASSICS
an imprint of
penguin books
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   3 21/05/15   3:00 PMPENGUIN CLASSICS
UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | Australia
India  | New Zealand  |South Africa
Penguin Classics is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies  
whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com.
This translation first published 2009
This edition first published in Penguin Classics 2014
001
Translation and editorial material copyright © Tim Parks, 2009
All rights reserved
Cover design and illustration: Coralie  Bickford- Smith
The moral right of the translator and editor has been asserted
Set in 10/13 pt Dante MT Std
Typeset by Jouve (UK), Milton Keynes
Printed in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, St Ives plc
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
isbn: 978– 0– 141– 39587– 6
www. greenpenguin.co.u k
Penguin Random Hous e is commi tted to a 
sustainable futu re for our business,  our re aders  
and our planet book  is made fr om Fo rest 
Stewardship Council® cer tiﬁed pa per.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   4 21/05/15   3:00 PMContents
  Introduction ix
  Translator’s Note xxxix
  Map lvii
THE PRINCE
  Letter to Lorenzo de’ Medici 3
 1. Different kinds of states and  
how to conquer them 5
 2. Hereditary monarchies 7
 3. Mixed monarchies 9
 4. Conquered by Alexander the Great,  the Kingdom of Darius did not rebel  against his successors after his death.  Why not? 21
 5. How to govern cities and states that  were previously  self- governing 25
 6. States won by the new ruler’s own  forces and abilities 27
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   5 21/05/15   3:00 PMContents
 7. States won by lucky circumstance and 
someone else’s armed forces 33
 8. States won by crime 43
 9. Monarchy with public support 49
 10. Assessing a state’s strength 55
 11. Church states 59
 12. Different kinds of armies and a consideration of mercenary forces 63
 13. Auxiliaries, combined forces and  citizen armies 71
 14. A ruler and his army 77
 15. What men and particularly rulers are  
praised and blamed for 81
 16. Generosity and meanness 83
 17. Cruelty and compassion. Whether it  is better to be feared or loved 87
 18. A ruler and his promises 93
 19. Avoiding contempt and hatred 97
 20. Whether fortresses and other  strategies rulers frequently adopt  are useful 111
 21. What a ruler should do to win  respect 117
 22. A ruler’s ministers 123
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   6 21/05/15   3:00 PMContents
 23. Avoiding flatterers 125
 24. Why Italian rulers have lost  
their states 129
 25. The role of luck in human affairs,  
and how to defend against it 133
 26. An appeal to conquer Italy and free  it from foreign occupation 139
  Glossary of  proper names 145
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   7 21/05/15   3:00 PM9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   8 21/05/15   3:00 PMixIntroduction
Necessity. Must. Have to. Inevitably. Bound to. These are the 
words that recur insistently throughout The Prince. And 
then again: success, victory, prestige, achievement , and, on the 
other hand: loss, failure, defeat, death. These opposites are 
linked together by an almost obsessive use of because, so 
that, hence, therefore, as a result, as a consequence. From start 
to finish we have a vision of man manoeuvring precariously 
in a suffocating net of cause and effect. What is at stake is 
survival. Anything extra is luxury .
The Prince was written by a  forty- four- year- old diplomat 
facing ruin. After fourteen years of influence and prestige, a change of regime had led to his dismissal. Suspected of 
conspiring against the new government, he was imprisoned 
and tortured. The rapid reversal of fortunes could not have 
been more devastating. Found innocent and released, he left town to live with his wife and family on a small farm. 
For a worldly man and compulsive womanizer, used to 
being at the frenetic heart of public life, this too felt like 
punishment. Idle and bitter, he tramped the hills by day 
and, in the long, empty evenings, began to write down some considerations on how to win power and, above all,  how to hold on to it, how not to be a victim of 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   9 21/05/15   3:00 PMxIntroduction
circumstance. The result was a slim volume that would be 
a scandal for centuries.
Niccolò Machiavelli was born in Florence in 1469, the 
same year Lorenzo de’ Medici (il Magnifico) came to 
power. First male child after two daughters, Niccolò would 
grow up very close to his father, Bernardo, an  ex- lawyer, 
mostly unemployed, with good contacts but no significant 
wealth or influence. If the son was to rise in the world, 
and he was determined to do so, he would have to count 
on his own wits and charm. Niccolò’s younger brother, 
Totto, chose not to compete and went into the priesthood. 
The boys’ mother, it should be said, was an extremely 
devout woman, a writer of religious poems and hymns. 
Their father on the other hand was sceptical, more at home 
with the sober works of Latin antiquity than the Bible. 
Niccolò may have taken his writing skills from his mother, but over divisions on religion he stood with his father and the Roman historians.
One says of Lorenzo il Magnifico that he ‘came to 
power’, but officially Florence was a republic and since 
Lorenzo was only twenty years old in 1469 he was far too 
young to hold elected office; an explanation is required. 
When, in the thirteenth century , the Florentines had 
thrown out the noble families who used to run the town, 
they introduced a republican constitution of exemplary 
idealism. A government of eight priori led by one gonfalo-
niere, or prime minister, would be elected every two 
months by drawing tags from a series of bags containing 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   10 21/05/15   3:00 PMxiIntroduction
the names of  well- to- do men from different guilds and 
different areas of town. This lottery would allow each 
major profession and each geographical area to be ade -
quately and constantly represented. Every individual (of a 
certain social standing) could expect a brief share of power 
in order that no one could ever seize it permanently .
The system was unworkable. Every two months a new 
government might take a different position on key issues. 
The potential for instability more or less obliged whichever 
family was in the ascendant to step in and impose continu-ity . From 1434 on, the Medicis –   first Cosimo, then Piero, 
then Lorenzo –   had been manipulating the electoral pro-
cess to make sure that most of the names in the bags were 
friendly to themselves and that all of those actually selected 
for government would toe the Medici line. Hence, although 
the Florentines still liked to boast that they were free citi-
zens who bowed the knee to no man, by the  mid- fifteenth 
century they were in fact living in something very close to a dictatorship. When the rival Pazzi family tried to assas-sinate Lorenzo in the Duomo in April 1478, it was because they saw no legitimate way of putting him in his place as an ordinary citizen. Machiavelli thus grew up in a society where the distance between how things were actually run and how they were described as being run could not have been greater. He was close to his ninth birthday when the 
captured Pazzi conspirators, one an archbishop, were hung 
upside down from the high windows of the city’s main 
government building and left there for weeks to rot. He 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   11 21/05/15   3:00 PMxiiIntroduction
would have understood very young the price of getting it 
wrong in politics.
The young Machiavelli might also have had reason to 
doubt that there was any meaningful difference between 
matters of religion and matters of state. The pope had 
backed the Pazzi conspiracy , priests had been involved in 
the assassination attempt and Lorenzo was excommuni -
cated after it failed; the religious edict was a political tool. 
A war between Florence and Rome ensued and the hostility 
only ended in 1480 when Turkish raids on the southern 
Italian coast prompted a rare moment of unity in the pen-
insula. Years later, Lorenzo would so ingratiate himself 
with a new pope as to get his son Giovanni made a cardinal 
at age thirteen. From excommunication to pope’s favourite 
was quite a change of fortune and once again it was more 
a matter of politics than of faith. Nothing, it appeared, was 
beyond the reach of wealth and astute negotiation.
At this point Machiavelli was  twenty- one. We know very 
little of his early adult life, but one thing he definitely did at least once was to listen to the fiery preacher Girolamo 
Savonarola, head of the influential monastery of San 
Marco. Savonarola’s was a different kind of Christianity: 
rather than the corrupt,  pleasure- conscious world of the 
papacy , whose decadence had offered no resistance to the 
rise of Humanism, this austere monk represented an early 
manifestation of what we have come to call fundamental-
ism, a return to the biblical text as the sole authority on earth and a vision of the Church as embattled and 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   12 21/05/15   3:00 PMxiiiIntroduction
defensive in a world increasingly interested in values that 
had little to do with the gospel story . With great conviction, 
Savonarola preached the virtues of poverty , advocated the 
burning of any book or work of art that was impure and prophesied doom for the sinful Florentines in the form of a foreign invasion. In 1494 his prophesy came true.
To get any grasp of Machiavelli’s diplomatic career and the 
range of reference he draws on in The Prince , one must 
have some sense of the complicated political geography 
of Italy in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, and 
of the profound change that occurred in the 1490s, a change 
that would determine Italy’s fate for the next 350 years.
For most of the fifteenth century there had been five 
major players in the peninsula: the Kingdom of Naples, 
the Papal States, Florence, V enice and Milan. Extending 
from just south of Rome to the southernmost tip of 
Calabria, the Kingdom of Naples was by far the largest. 
Wedged in the centre, with only precarious access to the sea, Florence was the smallest and weakest.
All five powers were in fierce competition for whatever 
territory they could take. Having lost much of their over -
seas empire to the Turks, the V enetians were eager to 
expand inside the northern Italian plain (Ferrara, V erona, Brescia) and down the Adriatic coast (Forlì Rimini). Con-
scious of the size and power of a now unified France to 
the north, Milan hoped for gains to the south and west 
(Genoa) as a  counter- weight. Florence simply tried to get 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   13 21/05/15   3:00 PMxivIntroduction
bigger in any way that was convenient. Over the previous 
century the Florentines had captured Arezzo, Pisa and 
Cortona and wasted huge energies in a series of failed 
attempts to conquer Lucca.
Rome’s aim under any pope was always to expand north 
and east into Romagna and Emilia, with a view to swal -
lowing up Perugia, Bologna, Rimini and Forlì, a project 
that would bring it into conflict with both Venice and Flor -
ence. In the far south, Naples was governed by a branch of the house of Aragon, but the crown was contested by the Angevin kings of France and by the Spanish royal fam-ily (also Aragons) which already ruled Sicily .
So the scenario was complicated. Scattered between the 
large states were at least a score of smaller ones, some no 
bigger than a town and the surrounding fields, and all con -
stantly under threat of invasion from one enemy or 
another. However, if the situation was rarely static, it is 
also true that there were few major changes. As soon as 
one power achieved some significant military victory , the others immediately formed an alliance against it to halt its 
progress. Florence, in particular, owed its continuing inde -
pendence largely to the fact that if V enice, Milan or Rome tried to take it, the other two would at once intervene to prevent this happening. So for more than a hundred years a certain balance of power had been kept. All this ended with the French invasion of 1494.
The invasion was, as Machiavelli himself explains in The 
Prince, largely the Italians’ own fault. For some time the 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   14 21/05/15   3:00 PMxvIntroduction
five states had been in the habit of frightening each other 
with the threat of foreign intervention. During the war 
against Rome and Naples in 1480, Florence had invited the 
French king to pursue his claim to the throne of Naples 
more actively . In 1482, during a Venetian assault on Ferrara, 
Florence and Milan had encouraged the Turks to step up 
their attacks on V enice’s maritime possessions. V enice had 
replied by inviting the Duke of Orleans to pursue his claim 
to Milan. In a war against Naples in 1483, Pope Innocent 
VIII had reminded the Duke of Lorraine that he too had a claim to the southern kingdom and invited him to send troops.
There was an element of bluff and brinkmanship in 
these threats, but in 1494 when King Charles VIII of France 
accepted Milan’s invitation to make good his claim to the 
crown of Naples, the bluff was called. Charles marched 
south with an army far larger than any Italians had seen in 
living memory . From that moment on, the peninsula would 
not be free from foreign intervention until the completion 
of the Risorgimento in 1870. Struggling to hold Naples, 
the French would invite in the Spanish from Sicily to split the kingdom with them, and the Spanish, after Charles I of Spain inherited the crown of the Holy Roman Empire, would eventually push France back north of the Alps, put Rome to the sack and dominate Italy for 150 years.
But that is to leap ahead. In 1494, when the French first 
marched through Lombardy heading for Naples, Florence 
was directly in their path and, what’s more, an ally of 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   15 21/05/15   3:00 PMxviIntroduction
Naples. At this point Lorenzo il Magnifico had been dead 
for two years and the Medici regime was led by his incom-
petent son, Piero. So abject was Piero’s capitulation to 
Charles, so spineless his decision simply to surrender the 
city’s dependent territories, that the Florentines rebelled 
against him. The Medici regime collapsed and very soon the preacher who had been prophesying this disaster was 
made gonfaloniere, first minister, this time on a yearly , rather 
than a  two- monthly , basis.
Girolamo Savonarola ruled Florence from 1494 to 1498, 
during which time the city passed from being one of the 
centres of Renaissance Humanism to a  book-  burning, fun -
damentalist theocracy . Realizing that Savonarola’s claim 
to be God’s prophet was a far greater threat to its authority 
than any Humanism, scepticism or eclecticism, the Church 
in Rome did everything possible to bring about his downfall 
and in 1498, having lost much of his support in Florence, 
the preacher was convicted of heresy and burned at the 
stake. It was shortly after these dramatic events that Nic-
colò Machiavelli succeeded in getting himself elected to 
the important positions of Secretary of the Second Chan-
cery (one of two key state departments in Florence) and, 
soon afterwards, Secretary of the Ten of War, a committee 
that dealt with foreign relations and war preparations.
Machiavelli was  twenty- eight. We have no idea how he 
arrived at such appointments at this early age. There is no record of any special experience that would warrant such 
confidence in his abilities. But within months he was 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   16 21/05/15   3:00 PMxviiIntroduction
travelling to neighbouring states to represent Florence’s 
interests, and over the next fourteen years he would be 
involved in important, often  long- drawn- out missions to 
the King of France, the pope, the Holy Roman Emperor, 
Cesare Borgia, Caterina Sforza and many others. In 
between these missions he was frequently and very actively 
engaged in Florence’s ongoing military campaign to  re- take 
Pisa, which had regained its independence during the 
French invasion. Pisa was crucial to Florentine commerce 
in that it gave the town an outlet to the sea.
Introductions to The Prince generally play down Machi-
avelli’s abilities as a diplomat, presenting these years as 
useful only in so far as they offered him the material he 
would draw on for his writing after he had lost his position. 
Machiavelli would not have seen things that way . For more 
than a decade he was Florence’s top diplomat and proud to be so, and if the missions he undertook did not produce spectacular results this was largely because he was repre-senting the weakest of the main states in Italy in a period 
of particular confusion and vulnerability that would even -
tually see four foreign powers militarily involved in the peninsula: France, Spain, the Holy Roman Empire and 
Switzerland.
Savonarola had taken Florence towards an alliance with 
France; the priest’s successors followed the same policy , 
but without any clear vision of how the city might achieve 
stability and security in the long term. To make matters 
worse, having decided in 1502 that their gonfaloniere, or first 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   17 21/05/15   3:00 PMxviiiIntroduction
minister, should be elected for life, the Florentines gave the 
job to Piero Soderini, an honourable man but chronically 
incapable of making any kind of bold decision. Machia -
velli’s diplomatic career was thus mostly taken up in 
attempts to persuade surrounding and threatening states 
to leave Florence alone and not to expect financial or mili-tary help from her for their wars elsewhere; that is, as far as there was a discernible,  long- term policy it was one of 
prevarication. Far from home, Machiavelli would fre -
quently receive contradictory orders after he had already 
started negotiating. Arriving in foreign towns, he would 
find that his expense allowance wasn’t sufficient to pay 
couriers to take his messages back to Florence. Sometimes 
he could barely afford to feed and clothe himself. Such was 
the contempt of the more powerful monarchs that he was 
often obliged to wait days or even weeks before being 
granted an audience.
It is in the light of these frustrations that we have to 
understand Machiavelli’s growing obsession, very much in 
evidence in The Prince, with the formation of a citizen army . 
Florence was weak partly because of its size but mostly 
because it had no military forces of its own. It relied on 
mercenary armies which were notorious for evaporating 
when things got tough, before the gates of Pisa for example. 
A  power-  base built on an efficient and patriotic civilian 
army would give a diplomat like Machiavelli a little more 
clout and respect when he negotiated. Or so he hoped.
In June of 1502, four years into the job, Machiavelli met 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   18 21/05/15   3:00 PMxixIntroduction
Cesare Borgia, son of Pope Alexander VI. With his father’s 
support, Borgia was carving out a new state for himself 
on the northern borders of the Papal States and had just 
captured the city of Urbino to the east of Florence. Sent on a mission to dissuade Borgia from advancing into Flor -
entine territory , Machiavelli was deeply impressed by the 
man. Seductive, determined, cunning and ruthless, Borgia 
was a leader in the epic mode. Certainly he could hardly 
have been more different from the diplomat’s dithering 
boss, Soderini.
Machiavelli was on another mission to Borgia in January 
1503 when the adventurer invited a group of rebels to nego -
tiations in the coastal town of Senigallia, then had them 
seized and murdered as soon as they were inside the town walls. Here was a man, Machiavelli realized, determined to take circumstance by the scruff of the neck. It was not 
so much Borgia’s willingness to ignore Christian principles 
that fascinated him, as his ability to assess a situation rap-idly , make his calculations, then act decisively in whatever 
way would bring the desired result. This modern, positivist 
attitude, where thought and analysis serve in so far as they 
produce decisive action, rather than abstract concepts, lies 
at the heart of The Prince.
Meanwhile Florence continued to drift. Machiavelli was 
once again on the scene in 1503, this time in Rome, when Borgia’s empire collapsed after both he and his father fell seriously ill; legend has it that Alexander had accidentally 
poisoned them both. The pope died and the son lost his 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   19 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxIntroduction
 power- base. Three years later Machiavelli was travelling 
with the later Pope Julius at the head of the papal army 
when Julius demanded admission to the town of Perugia, 
walked in with only a small bodyguard and told the local 
tyrant, Giampaolo Baglioni, to get out or face certain 
defeat. Sure that Baglioni would simply kill Julius, Machi-avelli was amazed when the man caved in and fled. Such 
were the pope’s coercive powers as he then marched north 
to lay siege to Bologna that Florence was once again forced 
to enter an alliance and a war in which it had no desire to be involved.
As Secretary of the Ten of War, Machiavelli enjoyed just 
one moment of personal glory , in 1509, when the citizen army that he had finally been allowed to form overcame 
Pisan resistance and took the town after a long siege. Given 
the many failed attempts to capture Pisa using mercenary armies, this victory was a powerful vindication of Machi-avelli’s conviction that citizen armies were superior. It was 
also the only occasion in his fourteen years of service when 
Soderini took the initiative with success.
But in every other respect things went from bad to 
worse. Florence was living on borrowed time, its freedom dependent on the whims of others. Three years after the 
capture of Pisa, when Pope Julius, now in alliance with the 
Spanish, defeated the French at Ravenna, he immediately sent an army to Florence to impose a return of the Medici 
and transform the city into a puppet state dependent on 
Rome. After brief resistance, the Florentine army was 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   20 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxiIntroduction
crushed at Prato a few miles to the north of the city . 
 Soderini escaped and the Medici returned. Machiavelli 
was unemployed and unemployable.
The scandalous nature of The Prince was largely deter -
mined by its structure rather than any conscious desire to 
shock. Originally entitled On Principalities, the book opens 
with an attempt to categorize different kinds of states and 
governments at different moments of their development, 
then, moving back and forth between ancient and modern 
history , to establish some universal principles relative to 
the business of taking and holding power in each kind of 
state. Given Machiavelli’s experience, wide reading and 
determined intellectual honesty , the project obliged him 
to explain that there were many occasions when winning 
and holding political power was possible only if a leader 
was ready to act outside the moral codes that applied to 
ordinary individuals. Public opinion was such, he explained, 
that, once victory was achieved, nobody was going to put the winner on trial. Political leaders were above the law .
Had Machiavelli insisted on deploring this unhappy state 
of affairs, had he dwelt on other criteria for judging a leader, aside from his mere ability to stay in power and 
build a strong state, had he told us with appropriate piety 
that power was hardly worth having if you had to sell your 
soul to get it, he could have headed off a great deal of 
criticism while still delivering the same information. But 
aside from one or two token regrets that the world is not 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   21 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxiiIntroduction
a nicer place, Machiavelli does not do this. It wasn’t his 
project. Rather he takes it for granted that we already know 
that life, particularly political life, is routinely , and some-
times unspeakably , cruel, and that once established in a 
position of power a ruler may have no choice but to kill 
or be killed.
This is where the words ‘of necessity’, ‘must’ and ‘have 
to’ become so ominous. For The Prince is most convincing 
and most scandalous not in its famous general statements –   
that the end justifies the means, that men must be pampered 
or crushed, that the only sure way of keeping a conquered 
territory is to devastate it utterly , and so on –   but in the 
many historical examples of barbarous behaviour that 
Machiavelli puts before us, without any  hand- wringing, as 
things that were bound to happen: the V enetians find that 
their mercenary leader Carmagnola is not putting much 
effort into his fighting any more, but they are afraid that 
if they dismiss him he will walk off with the territory he 
previously captured for them: ‘at which point the only safe 
thing to do was to kill him.’ Hiero of Syracuse, when given 
command of his country’s army , finds that they are all 
mercenaries and ‘realizing that they could neither make 
use of them, nor let them go, he had them all cut to pieces.’
The climax of this approach comes with Machiavelli’s 
presentation of the ruthless Cesare Borgia as a model for any man determined to win a state for himself (as if such 
a project were not essentially dissimilar from building a 
house or starting a business). Having tamed and unified 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   22 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxiiiIntroduction
the Romagna with the help of his cruel minister Remirro 
de Orco, Machiavelli tells us, Borgia decided to deflect 
people’s hatred away from himself by putting the blame 
for all atrocities on his minister and then doing away with 
him: so ‘he had de Orco beheaded and his corpse put on 
display one morning in the piazza in Cesena with a wooden 
block and a bloody knife beside. The ferocity of the spec-tacle left people both gratified and shocked.’
It’s hard not to feel, as we read the chapters on Borgia, 
that this is the point where Machiavelli’s book ceases to be the learned, but fairly tame, On Principalities and is trans-
formed into the extraordinary and disturbing work that 
would eventually be called The Prince. In short, Machiavel-
li’s attention has shifted from a methodical analysis of different political systems to a gripping and personally 
engaged account of the psychology of the leader who has 
placed himself beyond the constrictions of Christian ethics 
and lives in a delirium of pure power. For a diplomat like 
Machiavelli, who had spent his life among the powerful but never really held the knife by the handle, a state 
employee so scrupulously honest that when investigated for embezzlement he ended up being reimbursed monies that were due to him, it was all too easy to fall into a state of envy and almost longing when contemplating the awe-
some Borgia who had no qualms about taking anything 
that came his way and never dreamed of being honest to anyone.
At a deep level, then, the scandal of The Prince is 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   23 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxivIntroduction
intimately tied up with the scandal of all writers of fiction 
and history who in the quiet of their studies take vicarious 
enjoyment in the ruthlessness of the characters they 
describe –   but with this difference: Machiavelli systematizes 
such behaviour and appears to recommend it, if only to 
those few who are committed to winning and holding 
 political power. The author’s description, in a letter to a 
friend, of his state of mind when writing the book makes 
it clear what a relief it was, during these months immedi-
ately following his dismissal, imprisonment and torture, 
to imagine himself back in the world of politics and, if 
only on paper, on a par with history’s great heroes.
Come evening, I walk home and go into my study . In the 
passage I take off my ordinary clothes, caked with mud 
and slime, and put on my formal palace gowns. Then when 
I’m properly dressed I take my place in the courts of the 
past where the ancients welcome me kindly and I eat my 
fill of the only food that is really mine and that I was born 
for. I’m quite at ease talking to them and asking them why 
they did the things they did, and they are generous with 
their answers. So for four hours at a time I feel no pain, I forget all my worries, I’m not afraid of poverty and death 
doesn’t frighten me. I put myself entirely in their minds.
In so far as The Prince remains a persuasive account of how 
political power is won and lost it is so because it eventually 
focuses on the mind, or, to be more precise, on the 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   24 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxvIntroduction
interaction of individual and collective psychologies, the 
latter fairly predictable, the former infinitely varied, the 
two together dangerously volatile. The book is not a care-
ful elaboration of a rigid, predetermined vision. More and 
more, as Machiavelli rapidly assesses different kinds of 
states and forms of government, different contexts, differ -
ent men and their successes and failures, he runs up against 
two factors that defy codification: the role of luck and the 
mystery of personality . By the end of the book he is beyond 
the stage of offering heroes and success stories as models, 
aware that if there is one circumstance that a man cannot easily change it is his own character: even had he wanted to, Soderini could not have modelled himself on Borgia, nor vice versa.
In particular Machiavelli is fascinated by the way certain 
personality traits can mesh positively or negatively with 
certain sets of historical circumstances. A man can be suc-
cessful in one situation then fail miserably in another; a 
policy that works well in one moment is a disaster the next. 
Rather than one ideal ruler, then, different men are required 
for different situations. The only key to permanent political 
success would be always to adapt one’s deepest instincts 
to new events, but, as Machiavelli ruefully observes, that 
would effectively mean the end of ‘luck’ and the end of 
history .
Machiavelli’s own mind was deeply divided during the 
writing of The Prince and it is the resulting tension that 
accounts for much of the book’s fascination and ambiguity . 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   25 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxviIntroduction
On the one hand, as a form of private therapy , he was 
disinterestedly pursuing the truth about power and politics: 
to establish how states really were won and lost would give 
him an illusion of control and bolster his  self- esteem. At 
the same time, and perhaps less consciously , he was vicari-
ously enjoying, in the stories of Borgia and others, the sort 
of dramatic political achievements that had always been 
denied to him. In this regard it’s interesting to see how 
rapidly he glosses over Borgia’s abject fall from power, his 
arrest, imprisonment and death, almost as if the author 
were in denial about his hero’s ultimate fallibility .
Therapeutic as this might have been, however, at another 
level The Prince was clearly written for publication and 
meant as a public performance. Machiavelli loves to show 
off his intelligence, his range of reference, his clever rea-
soning. Even here, though, his intentions were divided and 
perhaps contradictory . At his most passionate and focused 
he was involved in a debate with all the great historians 
and philosophers of the past and determined to show his 
contemporaries that his own mind was as sharp as the best. 
But in a more practical mood Machiavelli was planning to use the book as a passport to get himself back into a job: so evident and compelling, he hoped, would his analytical skills appear, that the ruler to whom he formally gave and 
dedicated the book would necessarily want to employ him; 
hence the flattering tone of the opening dedication and 
the addition of The Prince’s final patriotic pages proposing 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   26 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxviiIntroduction
that the ruler in question should be the man to rid Italy of 
foreign oppression.
Who was this ruler? Shortly before Machiavelli had been 
released from prison, Pope Julius had died and been replaced by Giovanni de’ Medici, il Magnifico’s son, the man who had become a cardinal at thirteen. This was March 1513. When he started work on The Prince some 
months later, Machiavelli had intended to dedicate the 
book to Giovanni’s brother, Giuliano, who had been put in charge of Florence after the Medicis’ return. However, when the effeminate Giuliano began to move away from 
politics and was replaced in Florence by his aggressive, 
warlike nephew Lorenzo, Machiavelli decided to switch 
the dedication to the younger man.
Thus far the writer showed himself flexible in the face 
of changing events. Yet there is something ingenuous and 
almost endearing in the clever diplomat’s miscalculation 
here. The brilliant reasoning required to convince yourself  
that you had got a grip on politics and history , the profound 
analysis that would demonstrate to your fellow intellectu-
als that you were as  clear- headed as Livy , Tacitus and 
Thucydides put together, were not the qualities that a 
young and hardly  well-  read Medici prince was likely to 
comprehend, never mind enjoy .
Given the book in 1515, Lorenzo probably never opened 
it and certainly didn’t take time to study Machiavelli’s care -
fully crafted reflections. Then, even if he had read it, would 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   27 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxviiiIntroduction
Lorenzo, or indeed any other ruler, have wanted to employ 
a diplomat who had gone on record as saying that trickery 
was largely the name of the game and that though it wasn’t 
important to have a religious faith it was absolutely essen-
tial to appear to have one? Machiavelli should have been 
the first to understand that as an instrument for furthering 
his diplomatic career, rather than a literary and philosoph-
ical achievement in its own right, the book’s honesty would 
be  self- defeating: the two goals were never compatible.
Surprised and disappointed by The Prince’s failure, Mach -
iavelli went back to womanizing. Aside from routine 
whoring, he fell in and out of love easily , pursuing passion 
without discretion or restraint. And just as he had more 
luck with romance than diplomacy , he had more success 
when he wrote ironic,  sex- centred comedies rather than 
candid but dangerous political analyses. In 1518 the first 
performance of his play The Mandragola, in which a young 
man invents the most absurd subterfuges to get a married 
woman into bed, won Machiavelli immediate celebrity; 
some years later Clizia, which this time has an older man 
 hell- bent on having his way with a very young woman, 
confirmed his talent.
But literary success was not enough for Machiavelli. It 
was active politics that interested him, and, though he 
laboured for ten years or so on his Discourses on Livy, then 
on a long history of Florence and finally on a short work entitled The Art of  War, it was his old job as the city’s prin-
cipal ambassador that he always yearned for. Finally , in 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   28 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxixIntroduction
1525, Pope Clement VII, alias Giulio de’ Medici (Giovanni’s 
cousin), drew the  ex- diplomat back into politics, asking 
him for advice on how to deal with the growing antagon-
ism between the French and the Spanish. As an eventual 
clash between the two great powers inside Italy loomed 
ever closer, Machiavelli was given the task of overseeing 
Florence’s defensive walls. When the crunch came, how-
ever, and the armies of Spain and the Holy Roman Empire, 
now united under the same crown, marched south into 
Italy , they simply bypassed Florence, went straight to Rome 
and sacked it. It was an occasion of the most disgraceful savagery on a scale Italy had not witnessed for centuries. In the aftermath, the Medici regime in Florence collapsed 
and once again Machiavelli was out of favour. Over -
whelmed with disappointment and in the habit of taking medicines that weren’t good for him, he died in June 1527, 
aged  fifty- eight, having accepted, no doubt after careful 
calculation, extreme unction.
That there are many different roads to notoriety and that 
a man’s achievements may combine with historical events in unexpected ways, are truths Machiavelli was well aware 
of. So he would have appreciated the irony that it was 
largely due to Luther’s Protestant reform and the ensuing 
wars of religion that his name became the object of the 
most implacable vilification and, as a consequence, univer -
sally famous.
The turning point came in 1572. The Prince had not been 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   29 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxIntroduction
published in Machiavelli’s lifetime. After circulating for 
years in manuscript form, then in a printed Latin edition 
(still entitled On Principalities), it finally appeared in Italian 
in 1532, only to be put on Pope Paul IV’s Index of Prohibited 
Books in 1559, this partly in response to the prompting of the English cardinal Reginald Pole, who maintained that, written as it was by ‘Satan’s finger’, The Prince was largely responsible for Henry VIII’s decision to take the English Church away from Rome.
Meantime, in France, the conflict between the Protest-
ant Huguenots and the Catholics was intensifying and 
would reach a head under the reign of the sickly young 
Charles IX, who for the most part was controlled by his 
mother, the Italian, indeed Florentine, Catherine de’ Med-
ici, daughter of the same Lorenzo de’ Medici to whom Machiavelli had dedicated The Prince. Catherine had brought a great many Italian favourites into the French 
court, a move guaranteed to arouse  anti- Italian feeling. In 
general, she sought to dampen down the religious conflict 
which threatened to tear France apart, but nevertheless 
she would be held responsible for the St Bartholomew’s 
Day Massacre of 1572 when thousands of Huguenots were 
murdered. One potential victim, Innocent Gentillet, 
escaped to Protestant Geneva and wrote a Discours contre 
Machiavel that was to set the tone for  anti-  Machiavellian 
criticism for decades to come.
Intended as an attack on Catherine de’ Medici and mili-
tant French Catholicism, and hence a defence of the 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   30 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxiIntroduction
Huguenots, the book described Catherine as a compulsive 
reader of Machiavelli and, playing on  anti- Italian feeling, 
claimed that both queen and writer were representative of 
a callous and villainous trait in Italian national character. 
Listed out of context, the ideas developed in The Prince  
were schematized and simplified, allowing readers to 
imagine they had read Machiavelli himself when what they 
were actually getting was a travesty that legitimized any 
form of brutality and rejoiced in amoral calculation.
From this point on, Machiavelli’s name escaped from 
the restricted circle of intellectual reflection and became 
a popular term of denigration. ‘Mach Evil’ and ‘Match- a- 
villain’ were typical English corruptions, ‘Mitchell Wylie’ 
a Scottish. Many critics would not bother reading his work 
in the original but take their information from Gentillet, 
whose ‘  Anti- Machiavel’, as his book became known, was 
quickly translated into Latin for English readers and then, 
some twenty years later, directly into English. At this point 
(the end of the sixteenth century) the first English trans-
lation of Machiavelli’s work was yet to appear.
Ironically , in the years after the St Bartholomew’s Day 
Massacre, as Catherine de’ Medici struggled to find some 
solution to France’s civil wars, and in particular to convince 
Catholics of the need to tolerate the existence of the 
Huguenots, if only in Huguenot enclaves, both she and 
her supposed mentor Machiavelli once again came under 
attack, this time from the Catholic side. The accusation 
now was that, in the attempt to avoid conflict, religious 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   31 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxiiIntroduction
truths of supreme importance were being subordinated 
to questions of political convenience, something that 
would eventually transform France, the Catholics feared, 
into a secular state.
Here the criticism comes closer to the real spirit of 
Machiavelli. Renaissance Humanism in general had shifted 
the focus of intellectual reflection from questions of the-
ology and metaphysical truth to matters of immediate and 
practical human interest. In general, however, lip service 
had always been paid to the ultimate superiority of reli -
gious matters and writers had avoided suggesting that there 
might be a profound incompatibility between rival value 
systems: it was perfectly possible, that is, to be a good Chris -
tian and an effective political leader.
Machiavelli, on the contrary , made it clear that, as he 
saw it, Christian principles and effective political leadership 
were not always compatible; situations would arise where 
one was bound to choose between the two. It was not, as his critics claimed, that he rejected all ethical values 
outright; the strength, unity and independence of a people 
and state certainly constituted goals worth fighting 
for (‘I love my country more than my soul’, Machiavelli 
declared in a letter to fellow historian Francesco Guicciar -
dini). But such goals could not always be achieved without 
abandoning Christian principles; two  value- systems were 
at loggerheads. To make matters worse, Machiavelli did 
not appear to be concerned about this. He took it as an 
evident truth: Christian principles were admirable, but not 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   32 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxiiiIntroduction
applicable for politicians in certain circumstances; the idea 
that all human behaviour could be assessed in relation to 
one set of values was naive and utopian. It was in so far as Machiavelli allowed these dangerous implications to sur -
face in his writing that he both unmasked, and himself 
became identified with, what we might call the unaccept-able face of Renaissance Humanism.
How much the presentation of the Machiavellian villain 
in Elizabethan and Jacobean drama, from Kyd and Marlowe, 
through to Middleton, Shakespeare and ultimately Ben 
Jonson, owed to Gentillet’s ‘  Anti- Machiavel’ and how much 
to a direct knowledge of Machiavelli’s writings is still a 
matter of academic dispute. In the 1580s an Italian version 
of The Prince was printed in England, avoiding a publication 
ban by claiming falsely on the frontispiece that it was 
printed in Italy . Many educated English people at the time 
had a good knowledge of Italian. Sir Francis Bacon had 
certainly read The Prince before its first legal publication in 
English in 1640, defending the Florentine in the Advancement 
of  Learning (1605) with the remark: ‘We are much beholden 
to Machiavel and others, that write what men do and not 
what they ought to do.’
But the ‘murderous Machiavel’ who gets more than 
400 mentions in Elizabethan drama, thus making the Flor -
entine’s name synonymous with the idea of villainy for 
centuries to come, is another matter. The Roman author 
Seneca had long ago established a tradition in tragic drama 
that featured an evil, calculating tyrant who would stop at 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   33 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxivIntroduction
nothing to grasp all the power he could. Renaissance Italian 
theatre had updated this type of villain with elements from 
Machiavelli, transforming the character into an unscrupu-
lous courtier who takes pleasure in wicked calculation and 
cruelty . It was from this model that the English theatre 
developed its endless  mani festations of the devious rogue 
(pander, miser, or revengeful cuckold) who administers 
poisons with aplomb and is never without a dagger 
beneath his cloak.
From the point of view of the dramatist, an unscrupu-
lous character who has a secret agenda and relies on his 
presumed intellectual superiority to dupe those around 
him is obviously an exciting proposition. Such a figure can be depended upon to create tension, keep the plot moving and allow for resolutions where the larger group’s benign 
order once again imposes itself after the tragic disturbance 
caused by the wicked, scheming individual. Beyond a super -
ficial repulsion that the audience feels towards such a 
character, be it Marlowe’s Jew of Malta, Webster’s Flami-neo in The White Devil, or Shakespeare’s Iago, there is also 
an undercurrent of excitement at the thought that it might 
be possible to take life entirely into one’s hands, manipulate 
people and circumstances at will and generally pursue one’s 
selfish goals without a thought for moral codes or eternal 
damnation: in this sense the Machiavellian villain looks 
ahead to the worst of modern individualism.
Then there was also, of course, the contrasting pleasure 
of seeing the clever schemer ‘hoist with his own petard’. 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   34 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxvIntroduction
As the years passed and the high tension of Jacobean tra-
gedy relaxed into the comedies of Ben Jonson and his 
contemporaries, the evil Machiavel became a pathetic fail-
ure whose complacently wicked designs inevitably and 
reassuringly led to his making a fool of himself. Fading out 
of British drama in the  mid- seventeenth century , this stock 
figure is still resurrected from time to time, most recently 
and hilariously in Rowan Atkinson’s Blackadder, a charac-ter who adds a visceral cowardice to the already long list of Machiavel’s vices.
To a great extent, no doubt, it was this identification of 
Machiavelli’s name with everything that was evil which 
kept The Prince in print and guaranteed that, despite the 
papal ban, it would be widely read. But there was more. 
As medieval Christianity and scholasticism sank into the 
past and science and reason made their slow , often unwel-
come advances, as Europe got used to religious schism and 
competing versions of the truth, the overriding question 
for any modern ruler inevitably became: how can I con -
vince people that I have a legitimate, reasonable  right to 
hold power and to govern? In England Charles Stuart 
would insist on the notion that kings had a divine right, 
this at a time when so many English monarchs had seized 
their crowns by force and cunning. Curiously enough, 
Charles’s great antagonist Cromwell felt that he too had 
a direct line to God and legitimacy , but through belief 
and piety rather than family and inheritance. Officially a 
 parliamentarian, Cromwell frequently governed without 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   35 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxviIntroduction
parliament or elections for fear the people might not see 
things God’s way .
Meantime, across Europe, the princes and princesses of 
ancient noble families took to marrying and remarrying 
each other in an  ever- thickening web of defensive alliances, 
as if density of blood and lineage might offer protection 
against the threat of usurpers or, worse still, republicanism 
and democracy . No family was more practised at this 
upmarket dating game than the Medici, who, partly thanks 
to an extraordinary network of connections, would hang on in Florence in a  client- state twilight lasting more than 
200 undistinguished years. Meantime, from Paris to Madrid 
to Naples, the court clothes became finer, the statues and monuments more pompous and the whole royal charade 
more colourful and more solemn, as though people might 
somehow be dazzled into believing that a king or a duke really did have a right to rule. Many prestigious works of art were commissioned with precisely this idea in mind.
But most of all Europe’s rulers worked hard to put a 
halo round their crowned heads, to appear religious and at all costs to uphold the Faith, sensing that this too would 
bolster their position and draw attention away from the 
mystery of their privileges. Later still, particularly after 
the French Revolution had destroyed any illusions about 
the rights of monarchs, the rather desperate card of 
‘respectability’ was played. Members of court, Napoleon 
ordered, shortly after usurping power, must attend soirées 
with their wives, to appear respectable and avoid gossip. 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   36 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxviiIntroduction
‘The death of conversation’, Talleyrand opined. Certainly , 
when a leader has to rely on appearing respectable to claim 
legitimacy , he is on thin ice indeed.
To this  long- drawn- out conspiracy of pomp and pious 
circumstance, Machiavelli’s little book was a constant threat. It reminded people that power is always up for 
grabs, always a question of what can be taken by force or treachery , and always, despite all protests to the contrary , 
the prime concern of any ruler. In their attempt to dis -
credit  The Prince, both religious and state authorities played 
up the author’s admiration for the ruthless Borgia, and 
never mentioned his perception that in the long run a ruler 
must avoid being hated by his people and must always put their interests before those of the aristocracy; the people are so many , Machiavelli reflected, that power ultimately lies with them.
Liberal and  left- wing thinkers were not slow to pick up 
on this aspect of the book. As Rousseau saw it, the whole 
of The Prince  was itself a Machiavellian ruse: the author 
had only pretended to give lessons to kings whereas in fact 
his real aim was to teach people to be free by showing them 
that royal power was no more than subterfuge. Both Spi-
noza and, later, the Italian poet Ugo Foscolo saw it the 
same way: The Prince was a cautionary tale about how power really worked, the underlying intention being to 
deprive those who held it of dignity and glamour and teach 
the people as a whole how to resist it; Machiavelli after all 
declared himself a republican and a libertarian. The 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   37 21/05/15   3:00 PMIntroduction
communist leader Antonio Gramsci would even see The 
Prince as looking forward to the dictatorship of the 
proletariat.
Others took a more traditional view: Bertrand Russell 
described The Prince as ‘a handbook for gangsters’, and in 
so doing did no more than repeat the position of Frederick 
the Great, who wrote a book to refute Machiavelli and 
present a more idealistic vision of monarchical govern -
ment. Others again (Jakob Burckhardt and Friedrich 
Meinecke) found a space between denigration and admir -
ation to suggest that the novelty of Machiavelli was to 
present leadership and  nation- building as creative processes 
that should be judged not morally but aesthetically; in a 
manner that looked forward to Nietzsche the charismatic leader made a work of art of himself and his government. 
Mussolini simply took the book at face value: it was a useful 
‘vade mecum for statesmen’, he enthused.
But whatever our interpretation of his intentions, one 
reaction that Machiavelli never seems to provoke is indif-ference. Reading The Prince it is impossible not to engage 
with the disturbing notion that politics cannot be governed 
by the ethical codes that most of us seek to observe in our ordinary lives. And however we react to this idea, once we have closed the book it will be very hard to go on thinking 
of our own leaders in quite the same way as we did before.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   38 21/05/15   3:00 PMxxxixTranslator’s Note
Translations have a way of gathering dust. This isn’t true 
of an original text. When we read Chaucer or Shakespeare 
we may need a gloss, or in the case of Chaucer a modern 
translation, but we only look at these things so that we can 
then enjoy the work as it was first written. And we’re struck 
by its immediacy and freshness, as if we had been able to 
learn a foreign language in a very short space of time with little effort and maximum reward.
This is not the case with an old translation. If we read 
Pope’s translation of Homer today , we read it because we want to read Pope, not Homer. Linguistically , the transla-tion draws our attention more to the language and poetry 
of our eighteenth century than to Homer or ancient 
Greece.
So to attempt a new translation of Machiavelli is not to 
dismiss previous translations as poor. We are just acknowl -
edging that these older versions now draw attention to 
themselves as moments in the English language. My efforts 
of course will some day meet the same fate. Such distrac-
tions are particularly unfortunate with Machiavelli, who 
insisted that he was only interested in style in so far as it 
could deliver content without frills or distraction. ‘I haven’t 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   39 21/05/15   3:00 PMxlTranslator’s Note
prettified the book,’ he tells us, ‘or padded it out with long 
sentences or pompous, pretentious words, or any of the 
irrelevant flourishes and attractions so many writers use; 
I didn’t want it to please for anything but the range and 
seriousness of its subject matter.’
I have taken that statement of intention as my guide in 
this translation, attempting wherever possible to free the 
text from the archaisms and corrosive quaintness of older 
English versions, to get to the essential meaning of the original and deliver it, as we say today , but perhaps not 
tomorrow , straight.
It isn’t easy . The first problem, and one that sets up all 
the others, is already there in the title: The Prince. What is a prince for Machiavelli? Well, a duke is a prince. The pope 
is a prince. A Roman emperor is a prince. The King of 
France is a prince. The Lord of Imola is a prince.
This won’t work in modern English. The English have 
Prince Charles. And the thing about Prince Charles is that 
he is not King Charles and probably never will be. And 
even if he were king he would wield no real power, not 
even the kind of power the pope wields, and we never think 
of the pope as a king or prince.
The only other idea we have of ‘the prince’, in English, 
is Prince Charming. This concept is a long way from the ageing Prince Charles and even further from the kind of 
prince Machiavelli was talking about. Machiavelli’s word 
‘prince’ does not mean ‘the son of the king’, and even less 
‘an attractive young suitor’. Machiavelli’s ‘principe’ refers 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   40 21/05/15   3:00 PMxliTranslator’s Note
generically to men of power, men who rule a state. The 
prince is the first, or principal, man.
So the translator is tempted to use the word ‘king’. At 
least in the past a king stood at the apex of a hierarchical 
system, he was the man who mattered. But it is difficult, translating Machiavelli, to use the word ‘king’ to refer to the lord of Imola, or a pope, or a Roman emperor. In the 
end, as far as possible, I have resolved this problem by using 
the rather unattractive word ‘ruler’, or even the more gen -
eric ‘leader’, though always making it clear that we’re talking about the political leader of a state. The book’s 
famous title, however, must be left as it is.
Even harder to solve is the translation of ‘virtù’, together 
with a number of other words that cluster round it. It would be so easy to write the English cognate ‘virtue’, 
meaning the opposite of vice, but this is not what Machi-
avelli was talking about. He was not interested in the 
polarity ‘good’/‘evil’, but in winning and losing, strength and weakness, success and failure. For Machiavelli ‘virtù’ was any quality of character that enabled you to take pol-itical power or to hold on to it; in short, a winning trait. It 
could be courage in battle, or strength of personality , or 
political cunning, or it might even be the kind of ruthless 
cruelty that lets your subjects know you mean business. 
But one can hardly write ‘cunning’ or ‘cruelty’ for ‘virtù’, even if one knows that in this context that is what the text 
means; because then you would lose the sense that 
although Machiavelli is not talking about the moral virtues 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   41 21/05/15   3:00 PMxliiTranslator’s Note
he nevertheless wants to give a positive connotation to the 
particular qualities he is talking about: this cruelty is aimed 
at solving problems, retaining power, keeping a state 
strong, hence, in this context it is a ‘virtù’.
Ugly though it may sound, then, I have sometimes been 
obliged to translate ‘virtù’ as ‘positive qualities’ or ‘strength 
of character’, except of course on those occasions –   because 
there are some –   when Machiavelli does mean ‘virtues’ 
in the moral sense: in which case he’s usually talking 
about the importance of faking them even if you may not 
have them. Faking, of course, when cunningly deployed 
for an appropriate end, is another important virtù. The spin 
doctor was not a notion invented in the 1990s.
Related to both these particular problems  –   prince, 
virtue –   is the more general difficulty that so many of the 
key words Machiavelli uses have English cognates through 
Latin –    for tuna, audace, circospetto, malignità, diligente, etc. 
In some cases they are true cognates –   prudente/prudent, 
for example –   but even then to use the cognate pulls us 
back to a rather dusty , archaic style. Aren’t the words ‘care -
ful’ or ‘cautious’ or ‘considered’ more often used now than 
the word ‘prudent’?
Something of the same difficulty can occur where there 
is no cognate in English but a traditional and consolidated 
dictionary equivalent for an old Italian term. Machiavelli 
frequently uses the word ‘ savio’, which has usually been 
translated ‘wise’, but again this invites the English version 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   42 21/05/15   3:00 PMxliiiTranslator’s Note
to drift towards that slightly stilted archaic style so often 
used to render great texts from the past; ‘sensible’ or on 
other occasions ‘shrewd’ are choices that, depending on 
the context, can combine accuracy with a prose that draws 
less attention to itself as a translation.
So the constantly recurring question as one translates 
The Prince is: what words would we use today to describe 
the qualities and situations Machiavelli is talking about? 
Of course sometimes there are no modern words, because 
there are certain things –   siege engines, cavalry attacks –   that 
we don’t talk about any more. On the whole, though, 
Machiavelli is chiefly interested in psychology or, rather, in 
the interaction of different personalities in crisis situations, 
and here, so long as the translator avoids the temptation 
to introduce misleading contemporary jargon, a great deal 
can be done to get The Prince into clear, contemporary 
English.
However, the difficulty of these lexical choices is infin-
itely compounded by Machiavelli’s wayward grammar and 
extremely flexible syntax. Written in 1513, The Prince is not 
easily comprehensible to Italians today . Recent editions of 
the work are usually parallel texts with a modern Italian 
translation printed beside the original. The obstacle for the 
Italian reader, however, is hardly lexical at all –   in the end 
he can understand a good ninety per cent of the words 
Machiavelli is using –   rather it has to do with a combination 
of extreme compression of thought, obsolete, sometimes 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   43 21/05/15   3:00 PMxlivTranslator’s Note
erratic grammar, and, above all, a syntax where subordin-
ate and  pre- modifying clauses abound in ways that the 
modern reader is not used to.
We are not talking here about those complex but always 
elegant Ciceronian sentences so admired and frequently 
mimicked by the English Augustans. Machiavelli has a 
more spoken, flexible, persuading, sometimes brusque 
voice, and to get that tone in English one has to opt for a 
syntax that is quite different from the original Italian. In 
particular, the sequence with which information is deliv-ered within the sentence frequently has to be reorganized. Here, to give the reader a sense of what he can expect, are 
three versions of the same paragraph, the last being my 
own. I haven’t chosen anything especially complex; it’s a 
fairly ordinary passage in which, as so often, Machiavelli 
poses a situation, then considers possible responses to it 
and the consequences of each response. The first transla-tion is from W . K. Marriot and was published in 1908.
A prince is also respected when he is either a true friend 
or a downright enemy , that is to say , when, without any 
reservation, he declares himself in favour of one party 
against the other; which course will always be more advan -
tageous than standing neutral; because if two of your 
powerful neighbours come to blows, they are of such a 
character that, if one of them conquers, you have either 
to fear him or not. In either case it will always be more 
advantageous for you to declare yourself and to make war 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   44 21/05/15   3:00 PMxlvTranslator’s Note
strenuously; because, in the first case, if you do not declare 
yourself, you will invariably fall a prey to the conqueror, 
to the pleasure and satisfaction of him who has been con-
quered, and you will have no reasons to offer, nor anything 
to protect or to shelter you. Because he who conquers does 
not want doubtful friends who will not aid him in the time 
of trial; and he who loses will not harbour you because 
you did not willingly , sword in hand, court his fate.
The second is from George Bull, published in 1961.
A prince also wins prestige for being a true friend or a true enemy , that is, for revealing himself without any 
reservation in favour of one side against another. This pol -
icy is always more advantageous than neutrality . For instance, if the powers neighbouring on you come to 
blows, either they are such that, if one of them conquers, you will be in danger, or they are not. In either case it will 
always be to your advantage to declare yourself and to 
wage a vigorous war; because, in the first case, if you do 
not declare yourself you will always be at the mercy of the 
conqueror, much to the pleasure and satisfaction of the one 
who has been beaten, and you will have no justification 
nor any way to obtain protection or refuge. The conqueror 
does not want doubtful friends who do not help him when 
he is in difficulties; the loser repudiates you because you 
were unwilling to go, arms in hand, and throw in your 
lot with him.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   45 21/05/15   3:00 PMxlviTranslator’s Note
And here is my own.
A ruler will also be respected when he is a genuine friend 
and a genuine enemy , that is, when he declares himself 
unambiguously for one side and against the other. This 
policy will always bring better results than neutrality . For example, if you have two powerful neighbours who go to 
war, you may or may not have reason to fear the winner 
afterwards. Either way it will always be better to take sides 
and fight hard. If you do have cause to fear but stay neutral, 
you’ll still be gobbled up by the winner to the amusement 
and satisfaction of the loser; you’ll have no excuses, no 
defence and nowhere to hide. Because a winner doesn’t 
want  half- hearted friends who don’t help him in a crisis; 
and the loser will have nothing to do with you since you 
didn’t choose to fight alongside him and share his fate.
A typically tricky moment in this passage comes when 
Machiavelli says of these neighbouring powers:
. . . o sono di qualità che, vincendo uno di quelli, tu abbia 
a temere del vincitore, o no.
Literally:
. . . either they are of qualities that, winning one of those, 
you ought to fear the winner, or not.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   46 21/05/15   3:00 PMxlviiTranslator’s Note
Here Marriot gives:
. . . they are of such a character that, if one of them con-
quers, you have either to fear him or not.
And Bull:
. . . either they are such that, if one of them conquers, you 
will be in danger, or they are not.
Here it’s clear that Bull is closer to modern prose, yet 
one still feels that nobody writing down this idea today 
in English would introduce the second part of Machiavelli’s alternative as Bull does by tagging that ‘or they are not’ on to the end of the sentence after the introduction of an ‘if ’ 
clause. If we follow Bull’s general structure but move the alternative forward  –   thus, ‘either they are or they 
aren’t such that if one of them conquers, you will be in 
danger’ –   the sentence gains in fluency . In the end, however, 
the simplest solution seemed to me to shift the alternative 
aspect towards the verb ‘fear’ and away from a description of the two states; this leaves the sense of the sentence intact 
and allows us to get closer to the original’s telegraphic 
delivery .
. . . you may or may not have reason to fear the winner 
afterwards.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   47 21/05/15   3:00 PMxlviiiTranslator’s Note
Let me say at this point that I have the greatest respect 
for both these earlier translations and indeed various 
others. I owe a lot to them, because, although I have always 
translated directly from the original, I have then gone to these and to the modern Italian translations to see 
where they disagree and to mull over what I can learn from 
them. The original text is such that on occasion all four 
of the translations I have been looking at, two English and 
two Italian, offer different interpretations. In these cases 
one really must attune oneself to Machiavelli’s mental pro -
cesses, his insistence on logic, reason and deduction, and remember that every clause, if not every word, is there for a purpose.
Here is a small example. Having stated that rulers must 
at all costs avoid being hated by their subjects, and that 
such hatred is almost always the cause of a leader’s down-fall, Machiavelli foresees that some people will object that 
this wasn’t the case with many Roman emperors who 
either held on to power despite being hated by the people, or lost it despite being loved. ‘To meet these objections’, he tells us, ‘I shall consider the qualities of some of these emperors, showing how the causes of their downfall are not at all out of line with my reasoning above.’ So far so good, but this sentence then ends:
. . . e parte metterò in considerazione quelle cose che sono 
notabili a chi legge le azioni di quelli tempi.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   48 21/05/15   3:00 PMxlixTranslator’s Note
Translating word for word, this gives:
. . . and part I will put in consideration those things that 
are important to people who read the events of those times.
What is this about? Why did Machiavelli feel the need to 
add these words to a sentence that already seems clear 
enough. Bull offers:
. . . I shall submit for consideration examples which are 
well known to students of the period.
This may sound sensible and vaguely academic, but it 
simply isn’t accurate: the word ‘parte’ has gone; to ‘submit 
for consideration’ may be a standard English formula, but 
does it mean the same as Machiavelli’s actually rather 
unusual ‘put in consideration’? ‘Notabile’ doesn’t so much 
mean ‘well known’ as ‘worthy of note’ or ‘important’. Mar -
riot gives:
. . . at the same time I will only submit for consideration 
those things that are noteworthy to him who studies the 
affairs of those times.
Again we have the standard ‘submit for consideration’, 
while ‘at the same time’ and ‘only’ are both translator’s 
additions. It now sounds as if Machiavelli is reassuring us 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   49 21/05/15   3:00 PMlTranslator’s Note
that he will only look at examples that are relevant, but 
this sort of defensiveness is not the author’s way . Why 
would the reader have suspected him of introducing irrele -
vant examples?
One modern Italian translation gives: ‘e in parte indi -
cherò quei fatti che sono important per chi si interessa alla 
storia di quei tempi.’ Literally: ‘and in part I will indicate those facts that are important for people interested in the history of those times.’
This is now extremely close to our literal translation of 
Machiavelli’s original but still not particularly helpful. 
What is the author getting at? What does the phrase add to what has already been said?
Another Italian translation gives: ‘nello stesso tempo 
indicherò i fatti che devono essere messi in evidenza da chi 
si interessa alla storia di quei tempi.’ Literally: ‘at the same time I will indicate the facts that must be put in evidence by people interested in the history of those times.’
Despite the fact that ‘ parte’ has once again been mysteri -
ously transformed into ‘at the same time’ –   a classic filler 
when a translator is lost –   an idea at last emerges: that there 
are facts that people interested in those times ‘must put in 
evidence’, and the implication is that without these facts we won’t understand what has to be understood if we are to be persuaded by the author’s argument.
At this point the translator tries to enter Machiavelli’s 
reasoning, reassured by the knowledge that here we have 
an author who always put sense and clarity before anything 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   50 21/05/15   3:00 PMliTranslator’s Note
else. Machiavelli, remember, is facing objections from 
people who claim that the question of whether a ruler’s 
people do or do not hate him is not the crucial criterion 
when it comes to considering whether that leader will sur -
vive. Those objections, what’s more, are based on the lives 
of certain Roman emperors. What Machiavelli is going 
to show in the following paragraphs is that the nature 
of power and political institutions in the Roman empire 
was profoundly different from that in a modern (early  sixteenth- century) state, the key difference being the exist
-
ence, in Roman times, of a strong standing army that, for 
safety’s sake, a leader had to satisfy before satisfying the 
people and that could often only be kept happy by allowing 
it to treat the people very harshly , stealing and raping at 
will. What this little clause appears to be doing, then, is 
preparing us for Machiavelli’s approach to answering the 
objection that has been raised: it is a question, he is going to tell us, of understanding a different historical context.
The word ‘parte’ could be short for ‘a parte’ (apart, sep-
arately) or ‘in parte’ (in part), as both the Italian translations 
take it. Now perhaps we can read the sentence as a whole thus:
To meet these objections, I shall consider the qualities of 
some of these emperors, showing how the causes of their 
downfall are not at all out of line with my reasoning above, 
and bringing into the argument some of the context that historians of the period consider important.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   51 21/05/15   3:00 PMliiTranslator’s Note
The original ‘mettere in considerazione’ (‘put in consider -
ation’) is used only once in the whole of The Prince (having 
the text in electronic form is a huge help to the translator), 
hence the decision not to translate with a standard formula 
such as ‘submit for consideration’, but to give a more pre-cise sense to the words with the expression ‘bringing into 
the argument’: Machiavelli is advising us that for these 
particular examples he will have to fill in a different context. 
The idea of ‘parte’ I have understood as ‘in part’, and then for the sake of fluency rendered it with ‘some’: the author can’t bring in all the context, but some of it.
One has no way of knowing whether this is exactly what 
Machiavelli meant, but the sentence now gives an internal cohesion to the passage that was lacking in other versions. And if we return to our  word- for- word translation of the 
original – ‘and part I will put in consideration those things that are important to people who read the events of those 
times’ –   we see that it can indeed be read in the way we 
have chosen to render it.
One particularly pernicious problem a translator faces as 
he grapples with The Prince is the book’s reputation. Machi -
avelli is a scandal, every schoolboy knows, because he puts 
the ends before the means to the point of condoning acts 
of violence, cruelty and betrayal, something Christian and 
modern western ethics consider unacceptable: we don’t 
condone a brutal killing just because it puts an end to a 
riot and we are no longer at ease with the idea of torture, 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   52 21/05/15   3:00 PMliiiTranslator’s Note
even when it might prevent a terrorist atrocity . The climax 
of this scandal comes with the author’s discussion of 
Cesare Borgia, a man who rose to power and kept it with 
the use of extraordinary treachery and cruelty . The temp-tation for the translator is to play to the reputation of the 
book, underlining Machiavelli’s extreme views and making 
sure the text doesn’t ‘disappoint’, even when its tone and 
subtlety are not, perhaps, exactly what readers were 
expecting.
At the end of the discussion of Borgia, having recounted 
how he eventually lost power when his father, Pope Alex-ander, suddenly and unexpectedly died and a pope hostile 
to Borgia was elected, Machiavelli writes: ‘Raccolte io 
adunque tutte le azioni del duca, non saprei riprenderlo.’ Literally , we have: ‘Having gathered then all the actions of the duke, I would not know how to reproach him.’
Bull gives: ‘So having summed up all that the duke did, 
I cannot possibly censure him.’ Here the word ‘censure’ 
has a strong moral connotation, and the statement is made 
stronger still by the introduction of ‘can’t possibly’, which 
seems a heavy interpretation of the standard Italian for -
mula ‘I wouldn’t know how to’. In Bull’s version it seems that Machiavelli is making a point of telling us that he has no moral objections to anything Cesare Borgia did, this in line with the author’s reputation for cynicism.
Marriot more cautiously gives: ‘When all the actions of 
the duke are recalled, I do not know how to blame him’, and both Italian translations take the same line. The fact 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   53 21/05/15   3:00 PMlivTranslator’s Note
is that just as the word ‘virtù is rarely used in a strictly moral 
context, so the word ‘riprendere’, ‘reproach’, refers not to 
moral behaviour, but to the question: did the duke get 
something wrong, did he make a mistake? A key to reading 
the word comes at the opening to the next paragraph 
where we have: ‘Solamente si può accusarlo nella creazione 
di Iulio pontefice, nella quale lui ebbe mala elezione’, 
which, more or less literally , gives us: ‘The only thing Bor -
gia can be accused of is his role in the election of Pope 
Julius, where he made a bad choice’ (that is, as far as his 
own interests were concerned, he backed the wrong man).
Here we approach the subtler scandal of Machiavelli’s 
text: it is not that the author is insisting  that Borgia’s 
immoral acts should not be censured, rather that Machi-
avelli is just not interested in discussing the moral aspect 
of the question at all, or not from a Christian point of view . 
For him it is a case of shrewd or mistaken choices, not of 
good or evil. When he proposes Borgia as a model, neither 
morality nor immorality come into it, only the fact that 
this man knew how to win power and hold it and build a strong state.
Finally , one can’t help noticing a certain Victorian bashful-
ness in previous translations. Machiavelli was a notorious 
womanizer and in writing The Prince he believed he was 
addressing an audience of men who had no worries about political correctness. When he says ‘la fortuna è donna, et è necessario, volendola tenere sotto, batterla et urtarla’ –    
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   54 21/05/15   3:00 PMlvTranslator’s Note
literally: ‘fortune is woman and it is necessary wanting to 
keep her underneath to beat her and shove her’ –   there is 
an obvious sexual reference. The phrase comes in the last 
paragraph of The Prince proper (the closing exhortation is very much a piece apart) and Machiavelli wants to go out on a strong but, as he no doubt saw it, witty note.
Here is Marriot’s version of the whole last paragraph:
I conclude, therefore, that fortune being changeful and 
mankind steadfast in their ways, so long as the two are in 
agreement men are successful, but unsuccessful when they 
fall out. For my part I consider that it is better to be adven-
turous than cautious, because fortune is a woman, and if 
you wish to keep her under it is necessary to beat and  ill- use 
her; and it is seen that she allows herself to be mastered 
by the adventurous rather than by those who go to work more coldly . She is, therefore, always,  woman- like, a lover 
of young men, because they are less cautious, more violent, 
and with more audacity command her.
And Bull’s:
I conclude, therefore, that as fortune is changeable whereas 
men are obstinate in their ways, men prosper so long as 
fortune and policy are in accord, and where there is a clash 
they fail. I hold strongly to this: that it is better to be impetu -
ous than circumspect; because fortune is a woman and if 
she is to be submissive it is necessary to beat and coerce 
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   55 21/05/15   3:00 PMTranslator’s Note
her. Experience shows that she is more often subdued by 
men who do this than by those who act coldly . Always, 
being a woman, she favours young men, because they are 
less circumspect and more ardent, and because they com-
mand her with greater audacity .
I hope I am getting closer to the spirit of the thing and, for 
better or worse, the kind of man Machiavelli was, offering this:
To conclude then: fortune varies but men go on regardless. 
When their approach suits the times they’re successful, and 
when it doesn’t they’re not. My opinion on the matter is 
this: it’s better to be impulsive than cautious; fortune is 
female and if you want to stay on top of her you have to 
slap and thrust. You’ll see she’s more likely to yield that way 
than to men who go about her coldly . And being a woman 
she likes her men young, because they’re not so cagey , 
they’re wilder and more daring when they master her.
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   56 21/05/15   3:00 PMDUCHY OF
SA VOY
KINGDOM OF
                 NAPLES
0 100 Miles
0 150 Km 50 10050Rome
Naples
Messina
KINGDOM OF
SICILYTyrrhenian
SeaKINGDOM OF
SARDINIA
NGenoa
BolognaPadua
Venice
Florence
           PAPAL
STATESCORSICAREP.OFGENOAMilan
DUCHY OF
MILAN
REPUBLIC
OF SIENA
Adriatic
       SeaOTTOMAN
EMPIRETurin
Siena
PerugiaMagioneUrbino
AnconaSenigalliaPesaroRiminiCesenaRavenna
Prato
Lucca Pisa DUCHY OF
MODENAAquileia Verona
ParmaCaravaggio
DUCHY
OF MANTUA
DUCHY OF
FERRARAKINGDOM OF
HUNGARY
REPUBLIC OF
FLORENCEREP. OF
LUCCAREPUBLIC
O
F
V
E
N
IC
E
KINGDOM
O
F
FRAN
CE
Mediterranean
Sea
Italy in 1500Boundary of the
Holy Roman EmpireForli
9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   57 21/05/15   3:00 PM9780141395876_ThePrince_PRE.indd   58 21/05/15   3:00 PMTHE PRINCE
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   1 28/05/2015   14:14.Letter to Lorenzo de’ Medici
People trying to attract the good will of a sovereign usually
offer him something they care a lot about themselves, or
something they’ve seen he particularly likes. So rulers are
always being given horses, arms, gold brocades, jewels andwhatever ﬁnery seems appropriate. Eager myself to bringYour Highness some token of my loyalty, I realized there wasnothing more precious or important to me than my know-ledge of great men and their doings, a knowledge gained
through long experience of contemporary affairs and a con-
stant study of ancient history. Having thought over all I’velearned, and analysed it with the utmost care, I’ve writteneverything down in a short book that I am now sending toYour Highness.
And though this gift is no doubt unworthy of you, I feel
sure the experience it contains will make it welcome,especially when you think that I could hardly offer anythingbetter than the chance to grasp in a few hours what I havediscovered and assimilated over many years of danger and
discomfort. I haven’t prettiﬁed the book or padded it out with
long sentences or pompous, pretentious words, or any of theirrelevant ﬂourishes and attractions so many writers use; Ididn’t want it to please for anything but the range and serious-ness of its subject matter. Nor, I hope, will you think itpresumptuous that a man of low, really the lowest, stationshould set out to discuss the way princes ought to govern
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   2 28/05/2015   14:14.Letter to Lorenzo de’ Medici
People trying to attract the good will of a sovereign usually
offer him something they care a lot about themselves, or
something they’ve seen he particularly likes. So rulers are
always being given horses, arms, gold brocades, jewels andwhatever ﬁnery seems appropriate. Eager myself to bringYour Highness some token of my loyalty, I realized there wasnothing more precious or important to me than my know-ledge of great men and their doings, a knowledge gained
through long experience of contemporary affairs and a con-
stant study of ancient history. Having thought over all I’velearned, and analysed it with the utmost care, I’ve writteneverything down in a short book that I am now sending toYour Highness.
And though this gift is no doubt unworthy of you, I feel
sure the experience it contains will make it welcome,especially when you think that I could hardly offer anythingbetter than the chance to grasp in a few hours what I havediscovered and assimilated over many years of danger and
discomfort. I haven’t prettiﬁed the book or padded it out with
long sentences or pompous, pretentious words, or any of theirrelevant ﬂourishes and attractions so many writers use; Ididn’t want it to please for anything but the range and serious-ness of its subject matter. Nor, I hope, will you think itpresumptuous that a man of low, really the lowest, stationshould set out to discuss the way princes ought to govern
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   3 28/05/2015   14:144 the prince
their peoples. Just as artists who draw landscapes get down
in the valley to study the mountains and go up to the moun-tains to look down on the valley, so one has to be a prince toget to know the character of a people and a man of the peopleto know the character of a prince.
Your Highness, please take this small gift in the spirit in
which it is given. Study it carefully and you will ﬁnd that my
most earnest wish is that you should achieve the greatnessthat your status and qualities promise. Then if, from the highpeak of your position, you ever look down on those far below,you will see how very ungenerously and unfairly life continuesto treat me.1
Different kinds of states and how
to conquer them
All states and governments that ever ruled over men havebeen either republics or monarchies. Monarchies may be
hereditary, if the ruler’s family has governed for gener-
ations, or new. New monarchies can either be entirely new,as when Francesco Sforza captured Milan, or they could beterritories a ruler has added to his existing hereditary stateby conquest, as when the King of Spain took Naples. Anadditional territory won by conquest will be accustomed
either to living under a monarch or to the freedom of self-
government and may be conquered by the new ruler’s own
army or that of a third party, by luck or deservedly.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   4 28/05/2015   14:144 the prince
their peoples. Just as artists who draw landscapes get down
in the valley to study the mountains and go up to the moun-tains to look down on the valley, so one has to be a prince toget to know the character of a people and a man of the peopleto know the character of a prince.
Your Highness, please take this small gift in the spirit in
which it is given. Study it carefully and you will ﬁnd that my
most earnest wish is that you should achieve the greatnessthat your status and qualities promise. Then if, from the highpeak of your position, you ever look down on those far below,you will see how very ungenerously and unfairly life continuesto treat me.1
Different kinds of states and how
to conquer them
All states and governments that ever ruled over men have
been either republics or monarchies. Monarchies may be
hereditary, if the ruler’s family has governed for gener-
ations, or new. New monarchies can either be entirely new,as when Francesco Sforza captured Milan, or they could beterritories a ruler has added to his existing hereditary stateby conquest, as when the King of Spain took Naples. Anadditional territory won by conquest will be accustomed
either to living under a monarch or to the freedom of self-
government and may be conquered by the new ruler’s own
army or that of a third party, by luck or deservedly.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   5 28/05/2015   14:142
Hereditary monarchies
I won’t be considering republics since I’ve written about them
at length elsewhere. Instead I’ll concentrate on monarchies,
taking the situations mentioned above and discussing how
each kind of state can best be governed and held.
So I’ll begin by noting that hereditary monarchies where
people have long been used to the ruler’s family are far easierto hold than new ones; all a monarch need do is avoidupsetting the order established by his predecessors, trim
policies to circumstances when there is trouble, and, assum-
ing he is of average ability, he will keep his kingdom for life.Only extraordinary and overwhelming force will be able totake it off him and even then he’ll win it back as soon as theoccupying power runs into trouble.
An example of this situation in Italy is the Duchy of Ferrara.
In1484 and1510 the Duchy was brieﬂy conquered by foreign
powers, ﬁrst the Venetians, then Pope Julius, but these defeats
had nothing to do with the territory’s having a well-established ruling family. A ruler who inherits power has less
reason or need to upset his subjects than a new one and as a
result is better loved. If he doesn’t go out of his way to get him-self hated, it’s reasonable to suppose his people will wish himwell. When a dynasty survives for generations memories fadeand likewise motives for change; upheaval, on the contrary,always leaves the scaffolding for building further change.3
Mixed monarchies
When a monarchy is new, things are harder. If it’s not entirelynew but a territory added to an existing monarchy (let’s call
this overall situation ‘mixed’) instabilities are caused ﬁrst and
foremost by what is an inevitable problem for all new regimes:
that men are quick to change ruler when they imagine theycan improve their lot –it is this conviction that prompts them
to take up arms and rebel –then later they discover they were
wrong and that things have got worse rather than better.
Again this is in the normal, natural way of things: a ruler is
bound to upset the people in his new territories, ﬁrst with
his occupying army and then with all the endless injusticesconsequent on any invasion. So not only do you make enemiesof those whose interests you damaged when you occupied the
territory, but you can’t even keep the friendship of the people
who helped you to take power, this for the simple reason thatyou can’t give them as much as they expected. And you can’t
get tough with them either, since you still need them; becausehowever strong your armies, you’ll always need local support
to occupy a new territory. This is why Louis XII, King of
France, took Milan so quickly and equally quickly lost it. Theﬁrst time this happened Duke Ludovico was able to retakethe city with his own forces, because the people who hadpreviously opened the gates to Louis saw their mistake, real-ized they wouldn’t be getting the beneﬁts they’d hoped for
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   6 28/05/2015   14:142
Hereditary monarchies
I won’t be considering republics since I’ve written about them
at length elsewhere. Instead I’ll concentrate on monarchies,
taking the situations mentioned above and discussing howeach kind of state can best be governed and held.
So I’ll begin by noting that hereditary monarchies where
people have long been used to the ruler’s family are far easierto hold than new ones; all a monarch need do is avoidupsetting the order established by his predecessors, trim
policies to circumstances when there is trouble, and, assum-
ing he is of average ability, he will keep his kingdom for life.Only extraordinary and overwhelming force will be able totake it off him and even then he’ll win it back as soon as theoccupying power runs into trouble.
An example of this situation in Italy is the Duchy of Ferrara.
In1484 and1510 the Duchy was brieﬂy conquered by foreign
powers, ﬁrst the Venetians, then Pope Julius, but these defeats
had nothing to do with the territory’s having a well-established ruling family. A ruler who inherits power has less
reason or need to upset his subjects than a new one and as a
result is better loved. If he doesn’t go out of his way to get him-self hated, it’s reasonable to suppose his people will wish himwell. When a dynasty survives for generations memories fadeand likewise motives for change; upheaval, on the contrary,always leaves the scaffolding for building further change.3
Mixed monarchies
When a monarchy is new, things are harder. If it’s not entirely
new but a territory added to an existing monarchy (let’s call
this overall situation ‘mixed’) instabilities are caused ﬁrst and
foremost by what is an inevitable problem for all new regimes:
that men are quick to change ruler when they imagine theycan improve their lot –it is this conviction that prompts them
to take up arms and rebel –then later they discover they were
wrong and that things have got worse rather than better.
Again this is in the normal, natural way of things: a ruler is
bound to upset the people in his new territories, ﬁrst with
his occupying army and then with all the endless injusticesconsequent on any invasion. So not only do you make enemiesof those whose interests you damaged when you occupied the
territory, but you can’t even keep the friendship of the people
who helped you to take power, this for the simple reason thatyou can’t give them as much as they expected. And you can’tget tough with them either, since you still need them; becausehowever strong your armies, you’ll always need local support
to occupy a new territory. This is why Louis XII, King ofFrance, took Milan so quickly and equally quickly lost it. Theﬁrst time this happened Duke Ludovico was able to retakethe city with his own forces, because the people who hadpreviously opened the gates to Louis saw their mistake, real-ized they wouldn’t be getting the beneﬁts they’d hoped for
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   7 28/05/2015   14:148 the prince
and didn’t want to submit to the harsh conditions imposed
by the new king.
Of course, when a king returns to win back a territory that
has rebelled like this, he is less likely to lose it a second time.Having learned from the rebellion, he’ll have fewer scrupleswhen it comes to punishing troublemakers, interrogating sus-pects and strengthening any weak points in his defences. So
while the ﬁrst time Louis invaded Milan it took no more than
a little sword-rattling along the borders from Ludovico to
force a retreat, the second time it would take the whole worldto defeat his armies and drive them out of Italy. This for thereasons listed above. All the same, they were driven out both
times.
The general reasons behind the ﬁrst French defeat have
been discussed. It remains to explain why Louis lost Milan
the second time and to see what counter-measures he couldhave taken and what options a ruler has in a situation like
this if he wants to hold on to his conquest.
Needless to say, any territory annexed to the realm of a
conquering ruler may or may not be in the same geographical
region and share the same language. If it is and the languageis shared, the territory will be much easier to hold on to,especially if its people are not used to the freedom of self-
government. In that case all you have to do is eliminate the
family of the previous ruler and your hold on power is guaran-teed. Everything else in the territory can then be left as it wasand, given that there are no profound differences in customs,people will accept the situation quietly enough. Certainly
this has proved true in Burgundy, Brittany, Gascony and
Normandy, all of which have now been under French rule formany years. Even where there is some difference in language,the customs of these territories are similar and people can getalong with each other. So a ruler who has taken territories inthese circumstances must have two priorities: ﬁrst, to elimin-
ate the family of the previous rulers; second, to leave all lawsmixed monarchies 9
and taxes as they were. In this way the acquired territory andthe king’s original possessions will soon form a single entity.
But when a ruler occupies a state in an area that has a
different language, different customs and different insti-tutions, then things get tough. To hold on to a new possessionin these circumstances takes a lot of luck and hard work.Perhaps the most effective solution is for the new ruler to go
and live there himself. This will improve security and make
the territory more stable. The Turkish sultan did this inGreece, and all the other measures he took to hold on to thecountry would have been ineffective if he hadn’t. When you’reactually there, you can see when things start going wrong and
nip rebellion in the bud; when you’re far away you only ﬁnd
out about it when it’s too late. Another advantage is that the
new territory won’t be plundered by your ofﬁcials. Its subjectswill be happy that they can appeal to a ruler who is livingamong them. So, if they’re intending to be obedient, they’ll
have one more reason to love you, and if they’re not, all the
more reason to fear you. Anyone planning an attack fromoutside will think twice about it. So, if you go and live in thenew territory you’ve taken, you’re very unlikely to lose it.
Another good solution is to establish colonies in one or
two places. These work rather like chains to bind the captured
state to your own. If you don’t do this you’ll have to keep
large numbers of infantry and cavalry in the territory.
Colonies don’t cost a great deal. You can send and maintainthem very cheaply and they only arouse the hostility of thepeople whose houses and land are expropriated to give to the
colonists. Since that will only be a very small proportion of
the population, and since these people will now be poor andwill have ﬂed to different places, they can hardly cause much
trouble. Everyone else will be unaffected (hence prone to keepquiet) and at the same time frightened of stepping out of linefor fear of having their own houses and land taken away.In conclusion, colonies are cheap, more loyal, provoke less
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   8 28/05/2015   14:148 the prince
and didn’t want to submit to the harsh conditions imposed
by the new king.
Of course, when a king returns to win back a territory that
has rebelled like this, he is less likely to lose it a second time.Having learned from the rebellion, he’ll have fewer scrupleswhen it comes to punishing troublemakers, interrogating sus-pects and strengthening any weak points in his defences. So
while the ﬁrst time Louis invaded Milan it took no more than
a little sword-rattling along the borders from Ludovico to
force a retreat, the second time it would take the whole worldto defeat his armies and drive them out of Italy. This for thereasons listed above. All the same, they were driven out both
times.
The general reasons behind the ﬁrst French defeat have
been discussed. It remains to explain why Louis lost Milan
the second time and to see what counter-measures he couldhave taken and what options a ruler has in a situation like
this if he wants to hold on to his conquest.
Needless to say, any territory annexed to the realm of a
conquering ruler may or may not be in the same geographical
region and share the same language. If it is and the languageis shared, the territory will be much easier to hold on to,especially if its people are not used to the freedom of self-
government. In that case all you have to do is eliminate the
family of the previous ruler and your hold on power is guaran-teed. Everything else in the territory can then be left as it wasand, given that there are no profound differences in customs,people will accept the situation quietly enough. Certainly
this has proved true in Burgundy, Brittany, Gascony and
Normandy, all of which have now been under French rule formany years. Even where there is some difference in language,the customs of these territories are similar and people can getalong with each other. So a ruler who has taken territories inthese circumstances must have two priorities: ﬁrst, to elimin-
ate the family of the previous rulers; second, to leave all lawsmixed monarchies 9
and taxes as they were. In this way the acquired territory and
the king’s original possessions will soon form a single entity.
But when a ruler occupies a state in an area that has a
different language, different customs and different insti-tutions, then things get tough. To hold on to a new possessionin these circumstances takes a lot of luck and hard work.Perhaps the most effective solution is for the new ruler to go
and live there himself. This will improve security and make
the territory more stable. The Turkish sultan did this inGreece, and all the other measures he took to hold on to thecountry would have been ineffective if he hadn’t. When you’reactually there, you can see when things start going wrong and
nip rebellion in the bud; when you’re far away you only ﬁnd
out about it when it’s too late. Another advantage is that the
new territory won’t be plundered by your ofﬁcials. Its subjectswill be happy that they can appeal to a ruler who is livingamong them. So, if they’re intending to be obedient, they’ll
have one more reason to love you, and if they’re not, all the
more reason to fear you. Anyone planning an attack fromoutside will think twice about it. So, if you go and live in thenew territory you’ve taken, you’re very unlikely to lose it.
Another good solution is to establish colonies in one or
two places. These work rather like chains to bind the captured
state to your own. If you don’t do this you’ll have to keep
large numbers of infantry and cavalry in the territory.
Colonies don’t cost a great deal. You can send and maintainthem very cheaply and they only arouse the hostility of thepeople whose houses and land are expropriated to give to the
colonists. Since that will only be a very small proportion of
the population, and since these people will now be poor andwill have ﬂed to different places, they can hardly cause much
trouble. Everyone else will be unaffected (hence prone to keepquiet) and at the same time frightened of stepping out of linefor fear of having their own houses and land taken away.In conclusion, colonies are cheap, more loyal, provoke less
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   9 28/05/2015   14:1410 the prince
hostility among your new subjects, and, as I’ve said, those
few who are provoked can’t ﬁght back since they’ll be dispos-
sessed refugees. In this regard it’s worth noting that in generalyou must either pamper people or destroy them; harm themjust a little and they’ll hit back; harm them seriously and theywon’t be able to. So if you’re going to do people harm, makesure you needn’t worry about their reaction. If, on the other
hand, you decide to send an occupying army rather than
establish colonies, the operation will be far more expensiveand all the revenues from the new territory will be used up indefending it, turning what should have been a gain into a loss.And you’ll provoke more hostility: an army moving about
and requisitioning lodgings will do damage across the entire
territory, something that has consequences for the wholepopulation and turns them all into enemies. And these areenemies who can hit back, people beaten but still on theirown ground. So however you look at it military garrisons are
as pointless as colonies are useful.
A ruler who has moved into a new region with a different
language and customs must also make himself leader and
protector of the weaker neighbouring powers, while doingwhat he can to undermine the stronger. In particular, he musttake care that no foreign power strong enough to compete
with his own gets a chance to penetrate the area. People who
are discontented, whether out of fear or frustrated ambition,will always encourage a foreign power to intervene. It wasthe Aetolians who invited the Romans into Greece. Everytime the Romans moved into a new region it was on the
invitation of local people. And it’s in the nature of things that
as soon as a powerful foreign ruler moves into a region, all the
weaker local powers support him, if only out of resentmenttowards the stronger states that previously kept them down.So the new ruler will have no trouble winning their support;they’ll all run to ally themselves with the territory he hastaken. He just has to watch out that they don’t grab too muchmixed monarchies 11
power and authority. Then, with his own strength and theirsupport, he can easily undermine the more powerful neigh-bours and hence dominate the region. However, an invaderwho fails to manage relations with his new neighbours willsoon lose what territory he has taken; and even while he’sstill holding on to it, he’ll be up against all kinds of troubleand hostility.
The Romans followed these principles whenever they took
a new province: they sent colonists; they established friendlyrelations with weaker neighbours, though without allowingthem to increase their power; they undermined stronger neigh-bours and they prevented powerful rulers outside the region
from gaining inﬂuence there. Their handling of Greece will
be example enough: they established good relations with theAchaeans and the Aetolians; Macedonia’s power was under-mined; they drove out Antiochus. They didn’t reward thegood behaviour of the Achaeans and the Aetolians by
allowing them any new territory and whenever Philip con-
vinced them to establish friendly relations with him they madesure he was weakened as a result. Antiochus, for all hisstrength, was never allowed any inﬂuence in the region. TheRomans were simply doing what all wise rulers must: notrestricting themselves to dealing with present threats but using
every means at their disposal to foresee and forestall future
problems as well. Seen in advance, trouble is easily dealt with;wait until it’s on top of you and your reaction will come toolate, the malaise is already irreversible.
Remember what the doctors tell us about tuberculosis: in
its early stages it’s easy to cure and hard to diagnose, but ifyou don’t spot it and treat it, as time goes by it gets easy todiagnose and hard to cure. So it is with affairs of state. Seetrouble in advance (but you have to be shrewd) and you canclear it up quickly. Miss it, and by the time it’s big enough
for everyone to see it will be too late to do anything about it.
However, since they had this capacity for seeing a threat in
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   10 28/05/2015   14:1410 the prince
hostility among your new subjects, and, as I’ve said, those
few who are provoked can’t ﬁght back since they’ll be dispos-
sessed refugees. In this regard it’s worth noting that in generalyou must either pamper people or destroy them; harm themjust a little and they’ll hit back; harm them seriously and theywon’t be able to. So if you’re going to do people harm, makesure you needn’t worry about their reaction. If, on the other
hand, you decide to send an occupying army rather than
establish colonies, the operation will be far more expensiveand all the revenues from the new territory will be used up indefending it, turning what should have been a gain into a loss.And you’ll provoke more hostility: an army moving about
and requisitioning lodgings will do damage across the entire
territory, something that has consequences for the wholepopulation and turns them all into enemies. And these areenemies who can hit back, people beaten but still on theirown ground. So however you look at it military garrisons are
as pointless as colonies are useful.
A ruler who has moved into a new region with a different
language and customs must also make himself leader and
protector of the weaker neighbouring powers, while doingwhat he can to undermine the stronger. In particular, he musttake care that no foreign power strong enough to compete
with his own gets a chance to penetrate the area. People who
are discontented, whether out of fear or frustrated ambition,will always encourage a foreign power to intervene. It wasthe Aetolians who invited the Romans into Greece. Everytime the Romans moved into a new region it was on the
invitation of local people. And it’s in the nature of things that
as soon as a powerful foreign ruler moves into a region, all theweaker local powers support him, if only out of resentmenttowards the stronger states that previously kept them down.So the new ruler will have no trouble winning their support;they’ll all run to ally themselves with the territory he hastaken. He just has to watch out that they don’t grab too muchmixed monarchies 11
power and authority. Then, with his own strength and their
support, he can easily undermine the more powerful neigh-bours and hence dominate the region. However, an invaderwho fails to manage relations with his new neighbours willsoon lose what territory he has taken; and even while he’sstill holding on to it, he’ll be up against all kinds of troubleand hostility.
The Romans followed these principles whenever they took
a new province: they sent colonists; they established friendlyrelations with weaker neighbours, though without allowingthem to increase their power; they undermined stronger neigh-bours and they prevented powerful rulers outside the region
from gaining inﬂuence there. Their handling of Greece will
be example enough: they established good relations with theAchaeans and the Aetolians; Macedonia’s power was under-mined; they drove out Antiochus. They didn’t reward thegood behaviour of the Achaeans and the Aetolians by
allowing them any new territory and whenever Philip con-
vinced them to establish friendly relations with him they madesure he was weakened as a result. Antiochus, for all hisstrength, was never allowed any inﬂuence in the region. TheRomans were simply doing what all wise rulers must: notrestricting themselves to dealing with present threats but using
every means at their disposal to foresee and forestall future
problems as well. Seen in advance, trouble is easily dealt with;wait until it’s on top of you and your reaction will come toolate, the malaise is already irreversible.
Remember what the doctors tell us about tuberculosis: in
its early stages it’s easy to cure and hard to diagnose, but ifyou don’t spot it and treat it, as time goes by it gets easy todiagnose and hard to cure. So it is with affairs of state. Seetrouble in advance (but you have to be shrewd) and you canclear it up quickly. Miss it, and by the time it’s big enoughfor everyone to see it will be too late to do anything about it.
However, since they had this capacity for seeing a threat in
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   11 28/05/2015   14:1412 the prince
advance, the Romans always knew how to respond. They
never put off a war when they saw trouble coming; they knewit couldn’t be avoided in the long run and that the odds wouldsimply shift in favour of their enemies. They chose to ﬁght
Philip and Antiochus in Greece, so as not to have to ﬁght them
in Italy. They could have put off both wars, but they didn’t.They never took the line our pundits are constantly giving us
today –relax, time is on your side –but rather they put their
faith in their own foresight and spirit. Time hurries everything
on and can just as easily make things worse as better.
But let’s get back to the King of France and see if he took
any of the measures we’ve been discussing. And when I say
the King, I mean Louis, not Charles, since Louis held territory
in Italy for longer than Charles and it’s easier to see what hismethods were. You’ll notice that he did the opposite of whata ruler must do to hold on to conquests in a region whosecustoms and language differ from those of his home kingdom.
It was Venetian ambitions that brought Louis into Italy.
The Venetians planned to take half of Lombardy while heseized the other half. I’m not going to criticize Louis foragreeing to this. He wanted to get a ﬁrst foothold in Italy, he
didn’t have any friends in the region –on the contrary, thanks
to King Charles’s behaviour before him, all doors were barred
–so he was forced to accept what allies he found. And the
arrangement would have worked if he hadn’t made mistakes
in other departments. Taking Lombardy, the king recovered
in one blow the reputation that Charles had lost. Genoasurrendered. The Florentines offered an alliance. The Marquis
of Mantua, the Duke of Ferrara, Bentivogli of Bologna,
Caterina Sforza of Forlı `, the lords of Faenza, Pesaro, Rimini,
Camerino and Piombino, as well as the republics of Lucca,Pisa and Siena, all queued up to make friends. At which pointthe Venetians were in a position to see how rash they hadbeen when they proposed the initial deal: for two towns inLombardy they had made Louis king over a third of Italy.mixed monarchies 13
Think how easily Louis could have held on to his position
in Italy if he had observed the rules outlined above andguaranteed security and protection to all those friends. Therewere so many of them and they were so weak and frightened,either of Venice or Rome, that they were simply forced to sidewith Louis. Then with their help he could easily have defendedhimself against the states that were still powerful. But no
sooner had he arrived in Milan than Louis did the opposite;
he helped Pope Alexander to invade Romagna. He didn’t see
that this decision weakened his own position, losing himfriends and the support of those who had run to him for help,while reinforcing the pope, adding temporal dominion to the
spiritual power that already gives a pope so much authority.
Having made that ﬁrst mistake, he was dragged in deeper,
since, to curb Alexander’s ambitions and prevent him fromtaking control of Tuscany, he was forced to advance furtherinto Italy himself. Not content with having lost his friends
and increased the power of the Church, he was eager now to
get hold of the Kingdom of Naples and so made an agreementto split it with the King of Spain. Until then Louis had been thedominant power in Italy, but this move introduced anotherequally great power into the peninsula, with the result thatanyone in the region who had ambitions or was disgruntled
with Louis now had someone else to turn to. Louis could
have kept Naples under a client king but instead he kickedthe man out and brought in a king who was powerful enoughto kick him out.
The desire to conquer more territory really is a very natural,
ordinary thing and whenever men have the resources to doso they’ll always be praised, or at least not blamed. But whenthey don’t have the resources, yet carry on regardless, thenthey’re at fault and deserve what blame they get. If Louis wasin a position to capture the Kingdom of Naples with his ownforces, then he should have gone ahead and done it; if hewasn’t, he certainly shouldn’t have split the territory with
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   12 28/05/2015   14:1412 the prince
advance, the Romans always knew how to respond. They
never put off a war when they saw trouble coming; they knewit couldn’t be avoided in the long run and that the odds wouldsimply shift in favour of their enemies. They chose to ﬁght
Philip and Antiochus in Greece, so as not to have to ﬁght them
in Italy. They could have put off both wars, but they didn’t.They never took the line our pundits are constantly giving us
today –relax, time is on your side –but rather they put their
faith in their own foresight and spirit. Time hurries everything
on and can just as easily make things worse as better.
But let’s get back to the King of France and see if he took
any of the measures we’ve been discussing. And when I say
the King, I mean Louis, not Charles, since Louis held territory
in Italy for longer than Charles and it’s easier to see what hismethods were. You’ll notice that he did the opposite of whata ruler must do to hold on to conquests in a region whosecustoms and language differ from those of his home kingdom.
It was Venetian ambitions that brought Louis into Italy.
The Venetians planned to take half of Lombardy while heseized the other half. I’m not going to criticize Louis foragreeing to this. He wanted to get a ﬁrst foothold in Italy, he
didn’t have any friends in the region –on the contrary, thanks
to King Charles’s behaviour before him, all doors were barred
–so he was forced to accept what allies he found. And the
arrangement would have worked if he hadn’t made mistakes
in other departments. Taking Lombardy, the king recovered
in one blow the reputation that Charles had lost. Genoasurrendered. The Florentines offered an alliance. The Marquis
of Mantua, the Duke of Ferrara, Bentivogli of Bologna,
Caterina Sforza of Forlı `, the lords of Faenza, Pesaro, Rimini,
Camerino and Piombino, as well as the republics of Lucca,Pisa and Siena, all queued up to make friends. At which pointthe Venetians were in a position to see how rash they hadbeen when they proposed the initial deal: for two towns inLombardy they had made Louis king over a third of Italy.mixed monarchies 13
Think how easily Louis could have held on to his position
in Italy if he had observed the rules outlined above and
guaranteed security and protection to all those friends. Therewere so many of them and they were so weak and frightened,either of Venice or Rome, that they were simply forced to sidewith Louis. Then with their help he could easily have defendedhimself against the states that were still powerful. But no
sooner had he arrived in Milan than Louis did the opposite;
he helped Pope Alexander to invade Romagna. He didn’t seethat this decision weakened his own position, losing himfriends and the support of those who had run to him for help,while reinforcing the pope, adding temporal dominion to the
spiritual power that already gives a pope so much authority.
Having made that ﬁrst mistake, he was dragged in deeper,
since, to curb Alexander’s ambitions and prevent him fromtaking control of Tuscany, he was forced to advance furtherinto Italy himself. Not content with having lost his friends
and increased the power of the Church, he was eager now to
get hold of the Kingdom of Naples and so made an agreementto split it with the King of Spain. Until then Louis had been thedominant power in Italy, but this move introduced anotherequally great power into the peninsula, with the result thatanyone in the region who had ambitions or was disgruntled
with Louis now had someone else to turn to. Louis could
have kept Naples under a client king but instead he kickedthe man out and brought in a king who was powerful enoughto kick him out.
The desire to conquer more territory really is a very natural,
ordinary thing and whenever men have the resources to doso they’ll always be praised, or at least not blamed. But whenthey don’t have the resources, yet carry on regardless, thenthey’re at fault and deserve what blame they get. If Louis wasin a position to capture the Kingdom of Naples with his ownforces, then he should have gone ahead and done it; if hewasn’t, he certainly shouldn’t have split the territory with
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   13 28/05/2015   14:1414 the prince
another king. Sharing Lombardy with the Venetians was
forgivable, in that it gave him a foothold in Italy; but therewas nothing necessary about sharing Naples with Spain andhence it was a mistake.
So Louis made ﬁve mistakes: he eliminated the weaker
states; he enhanced the power of one of Italy’s stronger states;he brought in an extremely powerful foreign king; he didn’t
go to live in the territory he’d acquired and he didn’t establishcolonies there.
All the same, these mistakes might not have done serious
damage during his lifetime had he not now made a sixth bystripping Venice of its power. Of course, if he hadn’t increased
the pope’s power and brought Spain into Italy, it would have
been quite reasonable and even necessary to cut the Venetiansdown to size. But having taken those earlier decisions, heshould never have reduced Venice to such a state of weakness.As long as Venice was militarily strong, no one else was
going to try to take Lombardy from the French; the Venetians
wouldn’t have allowed another state to attack the regionunless they were going to get territory themselves and theother states would never have wanted to take Lombardy fromFrance if it meant giving it to Venice; plus, they would neverhave had the courage to confront France and Venice together.
Someone might object: but Louis gave Romagna to Pope
Alexander and Naples to Spain to avoid war; in which case,let me repeat what I said earlier: you must never fail to respondto trouble just to avoid war, because in the end you won’tavoid it, you’ll just be putting it off to your enemy’s advan-
tage. Someone else might insist that Louis had promisedthe pope he would attack Venice on his behalf in return forthe pope’s granting the French king a divorce and making theArchbishop of Rouen a cardinal; in this case let me refer thereader to what I’ll be saying later about when rulers should,or then again shouldn’t, keep their promises.
So Louis lost Lombardy because he didn’t take the measuresmixed monarchies 15
others have taken when they conquered territory and weredetermined to hold on to it. There’s nothing mysterious aboutthis; it’s all very normal and reasonable. In fact I discussedthe matter in Nantes with the Cardinal of Rouen when DukeValentino (that was what people used to call Cesare Borgia,Pope Alexander’s son) was invading Romagna; and when the
cardinal told me that the Italians knew nothing about war, I
told him that the French knew nothing about politics, because
if they did they wouldn’t be letting the pope grow so powerful.And as it turned out, it was Rome and Spain, the two stateswhose power in Italy France had built up, that provedFrance’s downfall. From which we can infer a general rule
that always holds, or almost always: that to help another ruler
to grow powerful is to prepare your own ruin; because ittakes ﬂair or military strength to build up a new power, and
both will seem threatening to the person who has beneﬁted
from them.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   14 28/05/2015   14:1414 the prince
another king. Sharing Lombardy with the Venetians was
forgivable, in that it gave him a foothold in Italy; but therewas nothing necessary about sharing Naples with Spain andhence it was a mistake.
So Louis made ﬁve mistakes: he eliminated the weaker
states; he enhanced the power of one of Italy’s stronger states;
he brought in an extremely powerful foreign king; he didn’t
go to live in the territory he’d acquired and he didn’t establish
colonies there.
All the same, these mistakes might not have done serious
damage during his lifetime had he not now made a sixth bystripping Venice of its power. Of course, if he hadn’t increased
the pope’s power and brought Spain into Italy, it would have
been quite reasonable and even necessary to cut the Venetiansdown to size. But having taken those earlier decisions, heshould never have reduced Venice to such a state of weakness.As long as Venice was militarily strong, no one else was
going to try to take Lombardy from the French; the Venetians
wouldn’t have allowed another state to attack the regionunless they were going to get territory themselves and theother states would never have wanted to take Lombardy fromFrance if it meant giving it to Venice; plus, they would neverhave had the courage to confront France and Venice together.
Someone might object: but Louis gave Romagna to Pope
Alexander and Naples to Spain to avoid war; in which case,let me repeat what I said earlier: you must never fail to respondto trouble just to avoid war, because in the end you won’tavoid it, you’ll just be putting it off to your enemy’s advan-
tage. Someone else might insist that Louis had promised
the pope he would attack Venice on his behalf in return forthe pope’s granting the French king a divorce and making theArchbishop of Rouen a cardinal; in this case let me refer thereader to what I’ll be saying later about when rulers should,or then again shouldn’t, keep their promises.
So Louis lost Lombardy because he didn’t take the measuresmixed monarchies 15
others have taken when they conquered territory and were
determined to hold on to it. There’s nothing mysterious aboutthis; it’s all very normal and reasonable. In fact I discussedthe matter in Nantes with the Cardinal of Rouen when DukeValentino (that was what people used to call Cesare Borgia,Pope Alexander’s son) was invading Romagna; and when thecardinal told me that the Italians knew nothing about war, I
told him that the French knew nothing about politics, because
if they did they wouldn’t be letting the pope grow so powerful.
And as it turned out, it was Rome and Spain, the two stateswhose power in Italy France had built up, that provedFrance’s downfall. From which we can infer a general rule
that always holds, or almost always: that to help another ruler
to grow powerful is to prepare your own ruin; because ittakes ﬂair or military strength to build up a new power, and
both will seem threatening to the person who has beneﬁted
from them.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   15 28/05/2015   14:144
Conquered by Alexander the Great, the
Kingdom of Darius did not rebel against
his successors after his death. Why not?
Now that we’ve seen how difﬁcult it is to hold on to recently
acquired territory some readers will be surprised to recall
what happened when Alexander the Great conquered Asia in
just a few years, then died very soon after his victory wascomplete. You would have thought the whole area wouldhave rebelled, yet Alexander’s successors held on to it andthe only trouble they had arose from their own personalambitions and inﬁghting. To explain this situation let’s start
by remembering that all monarchies on record have been
governed in one of two ways: either by a king and the servantshe appoints as ministers to run his kingdom; or by a king anda number of barons, who are not appointed by the kingbut hold their positions thanks to hereditary privilege. These
barons have their own lands and their own subjects who
recognize the barons as their masters and are naturally loyalto them. Where a state is governed by a king and his ministersthe king is more powerful since he is the only person in thestate whom people recognize as superior. When they obey
someone else it is only because he is a minister or ofﬁcial and
they have no special loyalty to him.
Examples of these two forms of government in our own
times are Turkey and France. The whole of Turkey is gov-erned by one ruler, or sultan. Everyone serves him. He divideshis realm into provinces, or sanjaks, and sends administrators
to run them, appointing and dismissing them as he sees ﬁt.why the kingdom of darius did not rebel 17
The King of France, on the other hand, is surrounded by anynumber of barons whose rights date back to ancient timesand who are acknowledged and loved by their subjects. Eachbaron has speciﬁc privileges which a king can only take awayat his peril. Looking at these two kinds of states, it’s clearthat Turkey is hard to conquer but once conquered very easyto hold. France on the other hand will be somewhat easier to
conquer but very hard to hold.
The reason why it’s hard to conquer a country like Turkey
is that there are no barons to invite you in and you can’t expect
anyone to make your invasion easier by rebelling against the
king. This follows naturally from the situation as described
above; since all subjects are the king’s servants and indebted
to him it’s hard to corrupt them, and even assuming you domanage to bribe someone he’s not likely to be much helpbecause he can’t bring any local people along with him, thisagain for the reasons I’ve explained. So, anyone attacking this
kind of country has to reckon that he will ﬁnd it united against
him and hence has to rely on his own armed forces rather
than on any mutiny in enemy ranks. But once you have wonand routed the enemy and made sure he can’t rebuild hisarmies, then the only thing to worry about is the king and hisfamily. Eliminate them and no one else can threaten you since
no one commands the loyalty of the people. Just as before
your victory you couldn’t look to any barons for help, soafter it there are none around to pose a threat.
The opposite is true in countries run along French lines.
Here you can make inroads easily enough, winning the sup-
port of a baron or two. There’s always someone unhappy
with the king and eager for change. Then these people arewell placed to get you a foothold in the country and help youto victory. But afterwards you’re going to have all kinds ofproblems holding on to what you’ve won, problems with thepeople who fought on your side and problems with those whofought against you and lost. This time it won’t be enough to
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   16 28/05/2015   14:144
Conquered by Alexander the Great, the
Kingdom of Darius did not rebel against
his successors after his death. Why not?
Now that we’ve seen how difﬁcult it is to hold on to recently
acquired territory some readers will be surprised to recall
what happened when Alexander the Great conquered Asia in
just a few years, then died very soon after his victory wascomplete. You would have thought the whole area wouldhave rebelled, yet Alexander’s successors held on to it andthe only trouble they had arose from their own personalambitions and inﬁghting. To explain this situation let’s start
by remembering that all monarchies on record have been
governed in one of two ways: either by a king and the servantshe appoints as ministers to run his kingdom; or by a king anda number of barons, who are not appointed by the kingbut hold their positions thanks to hereditary privilege. These
barons have their own lands and their own subjects who
recognize the barons as their masters and are naturally loyalto them. Where a state is governed by a king and his ministersthe king is more powerful since he is the only person in thestate whom people recognize as superior. When they obey
someone else it is only because he is a minister or ofﬁcial and
they have no special loyalty to him.
Examples of these two forms of government in our own
times are Turkey and France. The whole of Turkey is gov-erned by one ruler, or sultan. Everyone serves him. He divideshis realm into provinces, or sanjaks, and sends administrators
to run them, appointing and dismissing them as he sees ﬁt.why the kingdom of darius did not rebel 17
The King of France, on the other hand, is surrounded by any
number of barons whose rights date back to ancient timesand who are acknowledged and loved by their subjects. Eachbaron has speciﬁc privileges which a king can only take awayat his peril. Looking at these two kinds of states, it’s clearthat Turkey is hard to conquer but once conquered very easyto hold. France on the other hand will be somewhat easier to
conquer but very hard to hold.
The reason why it’s hard to conquer a country like Turkey
is that there are no barons to invite you in and you can’t expect
anyone to make your invasion easier by rebelling against theking. This follows naturally from the situation as described
above; since all subjects are the king’s servants and indebted
to him it’s hard to corrupt them, and even assuming you do
manage to bribe someone he’s not likely to be much helpbecause he can’t bring any local people along with him, thisagain for the reasons I’ve explained. So, anyone attacking this
kind of country has to reckon that he will ﬁnd it united against
him and hence has to rely on his own armed forces rather
than on any mutiny in enemy ranks. But once you have wonand routed the enemy and made sure he can’t rebuild hisarmies, then the only thing to worry about is the king and hisfamily. Eliminate them and no one else can threaten you since
no one commands the loyalty of the people. Just as before
your victory you couldn’t look to any barons for help, soafter it there are none around to pose a threat.
The opposite is true in countries run along French lines.
Here you can make inroads easily enough, winning the sup-
port of a baron or two. There’s always someone unhappy
with the king and eager for change. Then these people arewell placed to get you a foothold in the country and help youto victory. But afterwards you’re going to have all kinds ofproblems holding on to what you’ve won, problems with thepeople who fought on your side and problems with those whofought against you and lost. This time it won’t be enough to
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   17 28/05/2015   14:1418 the prince
eliminate the king’s family because there will always be barons
ready to assume authority when circumstances swing theirway, and, since you can never give them everything they wantand never eliminate them all, you’ll lose the territory you tookas soon as your enemies get an opportunity to rebel.
If we go back now to the Kingdom of Darius, we’ll ﬁnd
that it was of the Turkish variety. So Alexander ﬁrst had to
defeat its entire army and get control of the country; but oncehe’d done that, and once Darius was dead, he was securely incommand for the reasons cited above. And if his successorshad been united they could have run the region without anyworries; in fact the only trouble was the inﬁghting they started
themselves. But states organized the French way can never be
held so easily. The frequent uprisings against Roman powerin Spain, Gaul and Greece, for example, were the result ofthose regions’ being internally divided into so many princi-
palities. So long as people remembered their old loyalties to
local lords, Rome was never in complete control. But once
the power and permanence of empire had extinguished thoseloyalties, then Rome became the undisputed master of theregion. In fact, when the Romans started ﬁghting among
themselves, each warring commander was able to bring theprovince he was running into the conﬂict on his side, since
once the families of the old local rulers had been eliminated
the only authority people recognized was Rome’s representa-
tive. When you take all this into account, it’s really not sur-prising how easy it was for Alexander to hold Asia, nor howhard it was for many others, Pyrrhus for example, to hold on
to the territories they took. It wasn’t a question of the abilities
of each particular conqueror, but of the different kinds ofstate they had invaded.5
How to govern cities and states that were
previously self-governing
When the states you invade have been accustomed to gov-erning themselves without a monarch and living in freedom
under their own laws, then there are three ways of holding
on to them: the ﬁrst is to reduce them to rubble; the second
is to go and live there yourself; the third is to let them go onliving under their own laws, make them pay you a tax andinstall a government of just a few local people to keep thestate as a whole friendly. Since this government has been set
up by the invading ruler, its members know they can’t survive
without his support and will do everything they can to defendhis authority. Once you’ve decided not to destroy it, the bestway to hold a previously self-governing city is with the helpof its own citizens.
Let’s take our examples from Sparta and Rome. The Spartans
held Athens and Thebes by setting up governments run by afew local people, but in the end they lost these towns. TheRomans razed Capua, Carthage and Numantia to the groundand that way held on to them. They tried to hold Greece
in much the same way the Spartans had, granting it self-
government and leaving it its own laws, but it didn’t workand eventually they were forced to destroy quite a number ofcities so as to keep hold of the region as a whole.
The truth is that the only sure way to hold such places is
to destroy them. If you conquer a city accustomed to self-government and opt not to destroy it you can expect it to
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   18 28/05/2015   14:1418 the prince
eliminate the king’s family because there will always be barons
ready to assume authority when circumstances swing theirway, and, since you can never give them everything they wantand never eliminate them all, you’ll lose the territory you tookas soon as your enemies get an opportunity to rebel.
If we go back now to the Kingdom of Darius, we’ll ﬁnd
that it was of the Turkish variety. So Alexander ﬁrst had to
defeat its entire army and get control of the country; but oncehe’d done that, and once Darius was dead, he was securely incommand for the reasons cited above. And if his successorshad been united they could have run the region without anyworries; in fact the only trouble was the inﬁghting they started
themselves. But states organized the French way can never be
held so easily. The frequent uprisings against Roman powerin Spain, Gaul and Greece, for example, were the result ofthose regions’ being internally divided into so many princi-
palities. So long as people remembered their old loyalties to
local lords, Rome was never in complete control. But once
the power and permanence of empire had extinguished thoseloyalties, then Rome became the undisputed master of theregion. In fact, when the Romans started ﬁghting among
themselves, each warring commander was able to bring theprovince he was running into the conﬂict on his side, since
once the families of the old local rulers had been eliminated
the only authority people recognized was Rome’s representa-
tive. When you take all this into account, it’s really not sur-prising how easy it was for Alexander to hold Asia, nor howhard it was for many others, Pyrrhus for example, to hold on
to the territories they took. It wasn’t a question of the abilities
of each particular conqueror, but of the different kinds ofstate they had invaded.5
How to govern cities and states that were
previously self-governing
When the states you invade have been accustomed to gov-
erning themselves without a monarch and living in freedom
under their own laws, then there are three ways of holding
on to them: the ﬁrst is to reduce them to rubble; the second
is to go and live there yourself; the third is to let them go onliving under their own laws, make them pay you a tax andinstall a government of just a few local people to keep thestate as a whole friendly. Since this government has been set
up by the invading ruler, its members know they can’t survive
without his support and will do everything they can to defendhis authority. Once you’ve decided not to destroy it, the bestway to hold a previously self-governing city is with the helpof its own citizens.
Let’s take our examples from Sparta and Rome. The Spartans
held Athens and Thebes by setting up governments run by afew local people, but in the end they lost these towns. TheRomans razed Capua, Carthage and Numantia to the groundand that way held on to them. They tried to hold Greece
in much the same way the Spartans had, granting it self-
government and leaving it its own laws, but it didn’t workand eventually they were forced to destroy quite a number ofcities so as to keep hold of the region as a whole.
The truth is that the only sure way to hold such places is
to destroy them. If you conquer a city accustomed to self-government and opt not to destroy it you can expect it to
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   19 28/05/2015   14:1420 the prince
destroy you. Rebelling, its people will always rally to the
cry of freedom and the inspiration of their old institutions. Itdoesn’t matter how long they’ve been occupied or how benevo-lent the occupation, these things will never be forgotten.Whatever you do, whatever measures you take, if the popu-lation hasn’t been routed and dispersed so that its freedomsand traditions are quite forgotten, they will rise up to ﬁght
for those principles at the ﬁrst opportunity; just as the Pisans
did after a hundred years of Florentine dominion.
But when a people has been accustomed to living under a
ruler and the ruler’s family has been eliminated, then, sincethey’re used to obeying but now have no one to follow, they
won’t be able to choose a new leader from among themselves
nor to live in freedom without one, so they’ll be slower torebel and an invader can win them over and gain their loyaltymore easily. Republics, on the other hand, have more life inthem, more hatred and a greater thirst for revenge. Their
memory of old freedoms lingers on and won’t let them rest.
In these cases, your only options are to reduce the place torubble or go and live there yourself.6
States won by the new ruler’s own
forces and abilities
In the following discussion dealing with states where both theruler and the form of government are entirely new, no one
should be surprised if I choose to cite the most impressive
examples. The fact is that although people almost alwaysproceed by imitation, following in another man’s footsteps,you can never tread a model’s path or reproduce his qualitiesexactly. So, if you’re sensible, you set out to follow a trailblazed by someone who was truly great, someone really worth
imitating, so that even if you’re not on the same level yourself
at least you’ll reﬂect a little of his brilliance. It’s like the clever
archer who senses that his target is too far off, knows thelimitations of his bow, and so aims far higher than he nor-mally would, not because he really wants his arrow to go that
high, but to have it fall from a height on to his target.
So let’s start by saying that when it comes to entirely new
regimes where a new ruler has seized the state, the ease or
difﬁculty of his staying in power will be in proportion to hisabilities or failings. And since you can’t go from being an
ordinary citizen to a ruler without either talent or favourable
circumstances, we must suppose that one or the other ofthese factors will be offsetting, at least in part, a great manydifﬁculties. That said, those who haven’t relied too muchon lucky circumstances have lasted longer. Another positivefactor is that since in this case the ruler doesn’t already possessanother state, he will be forced to live in his new territory.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   20 28/05/2015   14:1420 the prince
destroy you. Rebelling, its people will always rally to the
cry of freedom and the inspiration of their old institutions. Itdoesn’t matter how long they’ve been occupied or how benevo-
lent the occupation, these things will never be forgotten.Whatever you do, whatever measures you take, if the popu-lation hasn’t been routed and dispersed so that its freedoms
and traditions are quite forgotten, they will rise up to ﬁght
for those principles at the ﬁrst opportunity; just as the Pisans
did after a hundred years of Florentine dominion.
But when a people has been accustomed to living under a
ruler and the ruler’s family has been eliminated, then, sincethey’re used to obeying but now have no one to follow, they
won’t be able to choose a new leader from among themselves
nor to live in freedom without one, so they’ll be slower torebel and an invader can win them over and gain their loyaltymore easily. Republics, on the other hand, have more life inthem, more hatred and a greater thirst for revenge. Their
memory of old freedoms lingers on and won’t let them rest.
In these cases, your only options are to reduce the place to
rubble or go and live there yourself.6
States won by the new ruler’s own
forces and abilities
In the following discussion dealing with states where both the
ruler and the form of government are entirely new, no one
should be surprised if I choose to cite the most impressive
examples. The fact is that although people almost alwaysproceed by imitation, following in another man’s footsteps,you can never tread a model’s path or reproduce his qualitiesexactly. So, if you’re sensible, you set out to follow a trailblazed by someone who was truly great, someone really worth
imitating, so that even if you’re not on the same level yourself
at least you’ll reﬂect a little of his brilliance. It’s like the cleverarcher who senses that his target is too far off, knows thelimitations of his bow, and so aims far higher than he nor-mally would, not because he really wants his arrow to go that
high, but to have it fall from a height on to his target.
So let’s start by saying that when it comes to entirely new
regimes where a new ruler has seized the state, the ease or
difﬁculty of his staying in power will be in proportion to hisabilities or failings. And since you can’t go from being an
ordinary citizen to a ruler without either talent or favourable
circumstances, we must suppose that one or the other ofthese factors will be offsetting, at least in part, a great manydifﬁculties. That said, those who haven’t relied too muchon lucky circumstances have lasted longer. Another positivefactor is that since in this case the ruler doesn’t already possessanother state, he will be forced to live in his new territory.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   21 28/05/2015   14:1422 the prince
But to turn to those who became rulers through their own
qualities rather than by luck, no doubt the most impressive
are: Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus and suchlike ﬁgures.
And though we can hardly say much about Moses, since hemerely carried out God’s orders, all the same we have toadmire him for the grace that made him worthy of God’sattention. But let’s look at Cyrus and other men who won
and founded kingdoms. We’ll ﬁnd they are all admirable and
when we look into the speciﬁc actions each took and the
institutions they established, we’ll see they don’t differ thatmuch from what Moses did under divine guidance. Analysingtheir lives and achievements, we notice that the only part luck
played was in giving them an initial opportunity: they were
granted the raw material and had the chance to mould it intowhatever shape they wanted. Without this opportunity theirtalent would have gone unused, and without their talent theopportunity would have gone begging.
So, if Moses hadn’t found the people of Israel in Egypt,
enslaved and oppressed and in need of a leader to get themout of the situation, they would never have been willing tofollow him. If Romulus hadn’t been abandoned at birth and
chosen to leave Alba Longa, how could he have become kingand founder of Rome? If Cyrus hadn’t found the Persians
ready to rebel against the occupation of the Medes, and the
Medes undisciplined and effeminate after a long period ofpeace, he couldn’t have achieved what he did. And Theseuscould hardly have shown his qualities if the Athenians hadn’t
ﬁrst been defeated and dispersed. These opportunities made
these men’s fortunes and it was because of their remarkable
qualities that they were able to recognize and grasp the oppor-tunities, bringing glory and even greater good fortune to theircountries.
These men and others like them who rise to sovereignty
through their own abilities face all kinds of difﬁculties whensetting up their states but then hold on to them fairly easily.states won by the new ruler’s own forces 23
The initial difﬁculties depend in large part on the fact that inorder to establish their government and guarantee its securitythey have to impose a new administrative system and newprocedures. Here we have to bear in mind that nothing isharder to organize, more likely to fail, or more dangerousto see through, than the introduction of a new system ofgovernment. The person bringing in the changes will make
enemies of everyone who was doing well under the old system,
while the people who stand to gain from the new arrange-ments will not offer wholehearted support, partly becausethey are afraid of their opponents, who still have the laws ontheir side, and partly because people are naturally sceptical:
no one really believes in change until they’ve had solid experi-
ence of it. So as soon as the opponents of the new system seea chance, they’ll go on the offensive with the determinationof an embattled faction, while its supporters will offer onlyhalf-hearted resistance, something that will put the new ruler’s
position at risk too.
To get a better grasp of the problem, we have to ask: is the
leader introducing the changes relying on his own resources,or does he depend on other people’s support; that is, does hehave to beg help to achieve his goals, or can he impose them?If he’s begging help, he’s bound to fail and will get nowhere.
But if he’s got his own resources and can impose his plans,
then it’s unlikely he’ll be running serious risks. This is whythe visionary who has armed force on his side has always wonthrough, while unarmed even your visionary is always a loser.Because on top of everything else, we must remember that the
general public’s mood will swing. It’s easy to convince people
of something, but hard to keep them convinced. So when theystop believing in you, you must be in a position to force themto believe.
Moses, Cyrus, Theseus and Romulus couldn’t have got
people to respect their new laws for long if they hadn’t pos-sessed armed force. We saw what happened in our own times
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   22 28/05/2015   14:1422 the prince
But to turn to those who became rulers through their own
qualities rather than by luck, no doubt the most impressive
are: Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus and suchlike ﬁgures.
And though we can hardly say much about Moses, since hemerely carried out God’s orders, all the same we have toadmire him for the grace that made him worthy of God’s
attention. But let’s look at Cyrus and other men who won
and founded kingdoms. We’ll ﬁnd they are all admirable and
when we look into the speciﬁc actions each took and the
institutions they established, we’ll see they don’t differ that
much from what Moses did under divine guidance. Analysingtheir lives and achievements, we notice that the only part luck
played was in giving them an initial opportunity: they were
granted the raw material and had the chance to mould it intowhatever shape they wanted. Without this opportunity theirtalent would have gone unused, and without their talent theopportunity would have gone begging.
So, if Moses hadn’t found the people of Israel in Egypt,
enslaved and oppressed and in need of a leader to get themout of the situation, they would never have been willing tofollow him. If Romulus hadn’t been abandoned at birth andchosen to leave Alba Longa, how could he have become kingand founder of Rome? If Cyrus hadn’t found the Persians
ready to rebel against the occupation of the Medes, and the
Medes undisciplined and effeminate after a long period ofpeace, he couldn’t have achieved what he did. And Theseuscould hardly have shown his qualities if the Athenians hadn’tﬁrst been defeated and dispersed. These opportunities made
these men’s fortunes and it was because of their remarkable
qualities that they were able to recognize and grasp the oppor-tunities, bringing glory and even greater good fortune to theircountries.
These men and others like them who rise to sovereignty
through their own abilities face all kinds of difﬁculties whensetting up their states but then hold on to them fairly easily.states won by the new ruler’s own forces 23
The initial difﬁculties depend in large part on the fact that in
order to establish their government and guarantee its securitythey have to impose a new administrative system and newprocedures. Here we have to bear in mind that nothing isharder to organize, more likely to fail, or more dangerousto see through, than the introduction of a new system ofgovernment. The person bringing in the changes will make
enemies of everyone who was doing well under the old system,
while the people who stand to gain from the new arrange-ments will not offer wholehearted support, partly becausethey are afraid of their opponents, who still have the laws ontheir side, and partly because people are naturally sceptical:
no one really believes in change until they’ve had solid experi-
ence of it. So as soon as the opponents of the new system seea chance, they’ll go on the offensive with the determinationof an embattled faction, while its supporters will offer onlyhalf-hearted resistance, something that will put the new ruler’s
position at risk too.
To get a better grasp of the problem, we have to ask: is the
leader introducing the changes relying on his own resources,
or does he depend on other people’s support; that is, does he
have to beg help to achieve his goals, or can he impose them?If he’s begging help, he’s bound to fail and will get nowhere.
But if he’s got his own resources and can impose his plans,
then it’s unlikely he’ll be running serious risks. This is whythe visionary who has armed force on his side has always wonthrough, while unarmed even your visionary is always a loser.Because on top of everything else, we must remember that the
general public’s mood will swing. It’s easy to convince people
of something, but hard to keep them convinced. So when theystop believing in you, you must be in a position to force themto believe.
Moses, Cyrus, Theseus and Romulus couldn’t have got
people to respect their new laws for long if they hadn’t pos-sessed armed force. We saw what happened in our own times
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   23 28/05/2015   14:1424 the prince
to Girolamo Savonarola: he was overthrown along with all
his reforms when people stopped believing in him. He had noway of keeping the initial believers on board or forcing thesceptical to see the light. But any new ruler bringing in changeswill have to deal with huge obstacles and dangers, mostly inthe early stages, and must overcome them with his own abil-ities. Once he’s done that and eliminated those who resented
his achievements, so that people start to respect and admire
him, then he can enjoy his power in safety and will livehonoured and fulﬁlled.
I’ve mentioned four exceptional leaders but now I want to
bring in a lesser man, Hiero of Syracuse, who nevertheless
had some of the same qualities as the others and will serve as
an example of a whole category. Originally an ordinarycitizen, Hiero became King of Syracuse. Once again the onlyluck he had lay in the initial situation: under threat fromCarthage, the Syracusans elected him as their military com-
mander and he was so successful they then made him king. In
fact, even as a private citizen he was so capable that one writersaid of him: ‘He had all it takes to be a king except a kingdom.’
Hiero disbanded the existing army and mustered a new one.He broke off old alliances and made new ones; that way, withhis own soldiers and his own allies to support him, he had
laid the foundation for building whatever he wanted. So it
cost him considerable effort to establish his power, but verylittle to hold on to it.7
States won by lucky circumstance
and someone else’s armed forces
A private citizen who becomes a ruler out of sheer good luckneedn’t make much effort to take his state but will have to
sweat if he is to hold on to it. He has no trouble climbing on
to his pedestal, since he is lifted there; but as soon as he is upon top, there will be any number of problems. I’m talkingabout situations where someone buys a territory with money,or is simply granted it as a favour. This was the case withquite a few rulers of cities in Ionia and the Hellespont: Darius
gave them their thrones so that they would govern with his
security and prestige in mind. Another example is thoseemperors who started out as private citizens and rose to powerby bribing the army.
These men rely entirely on the support and continuing
success of the people who gave them their power, which is tosay on two extremely unreliable and unstable quantities. Theydon’t know how to hang on to power and even if they did,they wouldn’t be able to. They don’t know how because,
unless they are remarkably gifted and competent, we can
hardly suppose that their lives as private citizens have
equipped them for command. They won’t be able to in anyevent because they don’t possess an army that can be reliedon to stay friendly and loyal. Like anything that appearssuddenly and grows fast, regimes that come out of nothinginevitably have shallow roots and will tend to crash in theﬁrst storm. Unless of course the man who is suddenly made a
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   24 28/05/2015   14:1424 the prince
to Girolamo Savonarola: he was overthrown along with all
his reforms when people stopped believing in him. He had noway of keeping the initial believers on board or forcing thesceptical to see the light. But any new ruler bringing in changeswill have to deal with huge obstacles and dangers, mostly inthe early stages, and must overcome them with his own abil-ities. Once he’s done that and eliminated those who resented
his achievements, so that people start to respect and admire
him, then he can enjoy his power in safety and will livehonoured and fulﬁlled.
I’ve mentioned four exceptional leaders but now I want to
bring in a lesser man, Hiero of Syracuse, who nevertheless
had some of the same qualities as the others and will serve as
an example of a whole category. Originally an ordinarycitizen, Hiero became King of Syracuse. Once again the onlyluck he had lay in the initial situation: under threat fromCarthage, the Syracusans elected him as their military com-
mander and he was so successful they then made him king. In
fact, even as a private citizen he was so capable that one writersaid of him: ‘He had all it takes to be a king except a kingdom.’
Hiero disbanded the existing army and mustered a new one.He broke off old alliances and made new ones; that way, withhis own soldiers and his own allies to support him, he had
laid the foundation for building whatever he wanted. So it
cost him considerable effort to establish his power, but verylittle to hold on to it.7
States won by lucky circumstance
and someone else’s armed forces
A private citizen who becomes a ruler out of sheer good luck
needn’t make much effort to take his state but will have to
sweat if he is to hold on to it. He has no trouble climbing on
to his pedestal, since he is lifted there; but as soon as he is upon top, there will be any number of problems. I’m talkingabout situations where someone buys a territory with money,or is simply granted it as a favour. This was the case withquite a few rulers of cities in Ionia and the Hellespont: Darius
gave them their thrones so that they would govern with his
security and prestige in mind. Another example is thoseemperors who started out as private citizens and rose to powerby bribing the army.
These men rely entirely on the support and continuing
success of the people who gave them their power, which is tosay on two extremely unreliable and unstable quantities. Theydon’t know how to hang on to power and even if they did,they wouldn’t be able to. They don’t know how because,unless they are remarkably gifted and competent, we can
hardly suppose that their lives as private citizens have
equipped them for command. They won’t be able to in any
event because they don’t possess an army that can be reliedon to stay friendly and loyal. Like anything that appearssuddenly and grows fast, regimes that come out of nothinginevitably have shallow roots and will tend to crash in theﬁrst storm. Unless of course the man who is suddenly made a
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   25 28/05/2015   14:1426 the prince
ruler turns out to be so talented that he immediately sets to
work to defend what luck has brought his way and to buildthe foundations that another leader would have establishedbefore coming to power.
I’d like to mention two men from our own times who
achieved power in these different ways, one through his ownabilities and one by luck. The people I have in mind are
Francesco Sforza and Cesare Borgia. With the right policies
and great courage, Sforza, a commoner, became Duke ofMilan and, having won power with enormous effort, heldon to it easily enough. Borgia, on the other hand, or DukeValentino as he was commonly known, received his territories
thanks to his father’s position, and when his father died he
lost them, this despite the fact that he used all means availableand did everything a sensible, capable man could have doneto lay the foundations for his own rule in the lands thatanother man’s army and position had won for him. As we
said earlier on, if you haven’t laid the foundations before
becoming king, it takes very special qualities to do it after-wards, and even then it’ll be tough for the architect and riskyfor the building. If we look carefully at Borgia’s strategies,
we’ll see that he did in fact lay down good foundations forfuture power; and I think it makes sense to discuss how he
did it, because I wouldn’t know what better advice to give a
ruler new to power than to follow his example. If his effortseventually came to nothing, it was not due to his own short-comings, but to an extraordinary run of bad luck.
When Pope Alexander VI decided to turn his son into a
powerful duke, he faced all kinds of obstacles, present andfuture. First, he couldn’t see how he could make him ruler ofanywhere that wasn’t Church territory. But he knew that if hegave away Church land, the Duke of Milan and the Venetianswould block him, since Faenza and Rimini were already underVenetian protection. What’s more, the armies then operatingin Italy, particularly those the pope might have called on forstates won by lucky circumstance 27
help, were all controlled by people –the Orsini, the Colonna
and associated families –who had reason to fear papal expan-
sionism, and hence couldn’t be trusted. What Alexander hadto do then was undermine the status quo and the authority ofhis rivals so as to seize control of part of their lands withimpunity. This turned out to be easy because, for reasons alltheir own, the Venetians were now determined to bring the
French back into Italy. Rather than opposing the move, the
pope smoothed the way by dissolving King Louis’s ﬁrst
marriage for him.
So the French king entered Italy with Venetian help and
papal consent. No sooner had he taken Milan than the pope
got the king to send troops to help his son, Borgia, take
Romagna, something that would have been impossible with-out Louis’s support. With the forces of the Colonna familynow beaten, Borgia faced two obstacles if he was to hold onto Romagna and acquire further territory: the ﬁrst was his
own army, which he suspected of disloyalty; the second wasFrench policy. Duke Valentino had been using the forces ofthe Orsini family but was afraid they would stop obeying hisorders, preventing him from making new gains and perhapsdepriving him of the old. And he had the same worries aboutthe King of France. His doubts about the Orsinis were con-
ﬁrmed when, after taking Faenza, he attacked Bologna, and
saw the soldiers anything but enthusiastic. Louis’s positionbecame clear when, having taken Urbino, Borgia advancedtowards Tuscany only to have the French king insist he turnback. After that he decided never to rely on other people’s
armies and authority again.
Soﬁrst of all he weakened the Orsini and Colonna factions
in Rome by luring the noblemen who supported them over
to his side with generous salaries and military and politicalappointments in line with each man’s rank. In a few monthsold loyalties were forgotten and they were all for the duke.Then, having broken up the Colonna leaders, he waited for a
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   26 28/05/2015   14:1426 the prince
ruler turns out to be so talented that he immediately sets to
work to defend what luck has brought his way and to buildthe foundations that another leader would have establishedbefore coming to power.
I’d like to mention two men from our own times who
achieved power in these different ways, one through his ownabilities and one by luck. The people I have in mind are
Francesco Sforza and Cesare Borgia. With the right policies
and great courage, Sforza, a commoner, became Duke ofMilan and, having won power with enormous effort, heldon to it easily enough. Borgia, on the other hand, or DukeValentino as he was commonly known, received his territories
thanks to his father’s position, and when his father died he
lost them, this despite the fact that he used all means availableand did everything a sensible, capable man could have doneto lay the foundations for his own rule in the lands thatanother man’s army and position had won for him. As we
said earlier on, if you haven’t laid the foundations before
becoming king, it takes very special qualities to do it after-wards, and even then it’ll be tough for the architect and risky
for the building. If we look carefully at Borgia’s strategies,we’ll see that he did in fact lay down good foundations forfuture power; and I think it makes sense to discuss how he
did it, because I wouldn’t know what better advice to give a
ruler new to power than to follow his example. If his effortseventually came to nothing, it was not due to his own short-comings, but to an extraordinary run of bad luck.
When Pope Alexander VI decided to turn his son into a
powerful duke, he faced all kinds of obstacles, present andfuture. First, he couldn’t see how he could make him ruler ofanywhere that wasn’t Church territory. But he knew that if hegave away Church land, the Duke of Milan and the Venetianswould block him, since Faenza and Rimini were already underVenetian protection. What’s more, the armies then operatingin Italy, particularly those the pope might have called on forstates won by lucky circumstance 27
help, were all controlled by people –the Orsini, the Colonna
and associated families –who had reason to fear papal expan-
sionism, and hence couldn’t be trusted. What Alexander had
to do then was undermine the status quo and the authority ofhis rivals so as to seize control of part of their lands withimpunity. This turned out to be easy because, for reasons alltheir own, the Venetians were now determined to bring the
French back into Italy. Rather than opposing the move, the
pope smoothed the way by dissolving King Louis’s ﬁrst
marriage for him.
So the French king entered Italy with Venetian help and
papal consent. No sooner had he taken Milan than the pope
got the king to send troops to help his son, Borgia, take
Romagna, something that would have been impossible with-out Louis’s support. With the forces of the Colonna family
now beaten, Borgia faced two obstacles if he was to hold onto Romagna and acquire further territory: the ﬁrst was his
own army, which he suspected of disloyalty; the second wasFrench policy. Duke Valentino had been using the forces ofthe Orsini family but was afraid they would stop obeying hisorders, preventing him from making new gains and perhapsdepriving him of the old. And he had the same worries aboutthe King of France. His doubts about the Orsinis were con-
ﬁrmed when, after taking Faenza, he attacked Bologna, and
saw the soldiers anything but enthusiastic. Louis’s positionbecame clear when, having taken Urbino, Borgia advancedtowards Tuscany only to have the French king insist he turnback. After that he decided never to rely on other people’s
armies and authority again.
Soﬁrst of all he weakened the Orsini and Colonna factions
in Rome by luring the noblemen who supported them over
to his side with generous salaries and military and politicalappointments in line with each man’s rank. In a few monthsold loyalties were forgotten and they were all for the duke.Then, having broken up the Colonna leaders, he waited for a
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   27 28/05/2015   14:1428 the prince
chance to eliminate the main Orsini men. The chance came
and he took it. Having realized, too late, that the growingpower of Borgia and the Church would be their ruin, theOrsini arranged to meet together at Magione, near Perugia.The meeting produced a rebellion in Urbino, uprisings inRomagna and all kinds of dangers for Borgia. But with thehelp of the French he won through.
Having recovered credibility, and not wanting to have to
put the loyalty of the French or anyone else to the test, Borgiaturned to trickery. He was so good at disguising his intentionsthat even the Orsini made peace with him, sending PauloOrsini as mediator. Borgia was extremely generous to Paulo,
reassuring him with gifts of money, clothes and horses, until
the ingenuous Orsinis eventually responded and accepted aninvitation to Senigallia, thus delivering themselves into theduke’s hands. Having killed the Orsini leaders then and forcedtheir followers to become his allies, Borgia had laid solid
foundations for his power: he held Romagna and the Duchy
of Urbino and, what’s more, he felt he had won the support ofthe local people who were beginning to enjoy some prosperity.
Since this last achievement deserves to be more widely
known and imitated, I want to give it the proper space. Ontaking control of Romagna, Borgia found it had been run by
weak leaders who had been stripping the people of their
wealth rather than governing them, and provoking divisionrather than unity, with the result that theft, feuds and allkinds of injustice were endemic. So he decided some goodgovernment was required to pacify the area and force people
to respect authority. With this in mind, he appointed Remirro
de Orco, a cruel, no-nonsense man, and gave him completecontrol. In a short while de Orco paciﬁed and united thearea, establishing a considerable reputation for himself in theprocess. At this point the duke decided that such draconianpowers were no longer necessary and might cause resentment.So he set up a civil court of law in the middle of the territorystates won by lucky circumstance 29
to which every town was to send a representative and heplaced a distinguished man in charge. And since he was awarethat the recent severity had led some people to hate him, inorder to have them change their minds, and hence win themover entirely to his side, he decided to show that if the regimehad been cruel, that was due to the brutal nature of hisminister, not to him. So as soon as he found a pretext, he had
de Orco beheaded and his corpse put on display one morning
in the piazza in Cesena with a wooden block and a bloodyknife beside. The ferocity of the spectacle left people bothgratiﬁed and shocked.
But let’s get back to where we left off. Borgia had consoli-
dated his power and secured himself against most immediatedangers, building up an army of his own and seeing off themajority of the other armies that had been near enough toattack him. At this point the only obstacle to further expan-sion was the King of France. Borgia knew the king had real-
ized he’d made a mistake supporting him earlier on and hence
would not put up with further adventures. So he began tolook around for new alliances and was less than generous inhis support when Louis marched south to ﬁght the Spanish
who were besieging Gaeta in the northern part of the King-dom of Naples. His aim was to be safe from French inter-
ference, something he would have managed soon enough no
doubt, if his father, Pope Alexander, had not died.
So that was how Borgia dealt with the immediate situation.As far as the future was concerned, what worried the duke
most of all was that his father’s eventual successor would be
hostile and try to deprive him of the territory Pope Alexander
had given him. He devised four strategies to guard againstthis: ﬁrst, eliminate the families of all the local rulers whose
land he had taken, thus denying a new pope the option ofrestoring them; second, win the support of all the noblefamilies of Rome (as we’ve already seen) so as to put thebrakes on any papal initiative; third, get as much control as
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   28 28/05/2015   14:1428 the prince
chance to eliminate the main Orsini men. The chance came
and he took it. Having realized, too late, that the growingpower of Borgia and the Church would be their ruin, theOrsini arranged to meet together at Magione, near Perugia.The meeting produced a rebellion in Urbino, uprisings inRomagna and all kinds of dangers for Borgia. But with thehelp of the French he won through.
Having recovered credibility, and not wanting to have to
put the loyalty of the French or anyone else to the test, Borgiaturned to trickery. He was so good at disguising his intentionsthat even the Orsini made peace with him, sending PauloOrsini as mediator. Borgia was extremely generous to Paulo,
reassuring him with gifts of money, clothes and horses, until
the ingenuous Orsinis eventually responded and accepted aninvitation to Senigallia, thus delivering themselves into theduke’s hands. Having killed the Orsini leaders then and forcedtheir followers to become his allies, Borgia had laid solid
foundations for his power: he held Romagna and the Duchy
of Urbino and, what’s more, he felt he had won the support ofthe local people who were beginning to enjoy some prosperity.
Since this last achievement deserves to be more widely
known and imitated, I want to give it the proper space. Ontaking control of Romagna, Borgia found it had been run by
weak leaders who had been stripping the people of their
wealth rather than governing them, and provoking divisionrather than unity, with the result that theft, feuds and allkinds of injustice were endemic. So he decided some goodgovernment was required to pacify the area and force people
to respect authority. With this in mind, he appointed Remirro
de Orco, a cruel, no-nonsense man, and gave him completecontrol. In a short while de Orco paciﬁed and united thearea, establishing a considerable reputation for himself in theprocess. At this point the duke decided that such draconianpowers were no longer necessary and might cause resentment.So he set up a civil court of law in the middle of the territorystates won by lucky circumstance 29
to which every town was to send a representative and he
placed a distinguished man in charge. And since he was awarethat the recent severity had led some people to hate him, inorder to have them change their minds, and hence win themover entirely to his side, he decided to show that if the regimehad been cruel, that was due to the brutal nature of hisminister, not to him. So as soon as he found a pretext, he had
de Orco beheaded and his corpse put on display one morning
in the piazza in Cesena with a wooden block and a bloodyknife beside. The ferocity of the spectacle left people bothgratiﬁed and shocked.
But let’s get back to where we left off. Borgia had consoli-
dated his power and secured himself against most immediatedangers, building up an army of his own and seeing off themajority of the other armies that had been near enough toattack him. At this point the only obstacle to further expan-sion was the King of France. Borgia knew the king had real-
ized he’d made a mistake supporting him earlier on and hence
would not put up with further adventures. So he began tolook around for new alliances and was less than generous inhis support when Louis marched south to ﬁght the Spanish
who were besieging Gaeta in the northern part of the King-dom of Naples. His aim was to be safe from French inter-
ference, something he would have managed soon enough no
doubt, if his father, Pope Alexander, had not died.
So that was how Borgia dealt with the immediate situation.As far as the future was concerned, what worried the duke
most of all was that his father’s eventual successor would be
hostile and try to deprive him of the territory Pope Alexander
had given him. He devised four strategies to guard againstthis: ﬁrst, eliminate the families of all the local rulers whose
land he had taken, thus denying a new pope the option ofrestoring them; second, win the support of all the noblefamilies of Rome (as we’ve already seen) so as to put thebrakes on any papal initiative; third, get as much control as
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   29 28/05/2015   14:1430 the prince
possible of the College that would elect the next pope; fourth,
win so much territory before the pope died as to be able toresist a ﬁrst attack with his own resources. By the time his
father died he had achieved three of these four goals andwasn’t far off achieving the fourth. He had killed all the localrulers he could get his hands on and hardly anyone hadescaped; he had won over the Roman nobility and he had
enormous inﬂuence over the Electoral College. As far as
extending his territory was concerned, he was aiming to be-come master of all Tuscany, having already captured Perugiaand Piombino and taken Pisa under his protection.
As soon as France’s restraining inﬂuence weakened (actu-
ally, it already had, since, having lost the Kingdom of Naplesto Spain, the French –and the Spanish too for that matter –
now needed Borgia’s support) he would grab Pisa. At thatpoint Lucca and Siena would quickly surrender, partly out offear and partly thanks to their old enmity with Florence, after
which the Florentines would be unable to defend themselves.
If Borgia had managed all this (and he was almost there thevery year Alexander died) he would have accumulated somuch power and prestige that he could have responded toany aggression with his own forces and talent and wouldn’thave needed to rely on anyone else’s armies or authority. But
Alexander died just ﬁve years after his son had ﬁrst drawn his
sword. Only in Romagna had Borgia consolidated his power;all his other territorial gains were still shaky. He was isolated,caught between two extremely powerful, hostile armies, and,what’s more, mortally ill.
Borgia was so ruthless and so talented, he knew so well
that you have to win over people or destroy them and he hadbuilt up such solid foundations for his power in such a shorttime that if he hadn’t had these two armies threatening him,or if he hadn’t been so ill, he would have overcome everyobstacle. That the foundations Borgia had built were soundwas soon evident: Romagna waited loyally for more than astates won by lucky circumstance 31
month while he lay half dead in Rome, and in Rome itself noone took advantage of his weakness; when his enemies, theBaglionis, Vitellis and Orsinis, turned up no one went overto their side. And though Borgia wasn’t able to choose whowould be the new pope, at least he was in a position to blockanyone he didn’t want. So if he had been in good health when
his father died, everything would have been easy. He himself
told me, in the days when the College was meeting to elect
Julius II, that he had thought over what might happen on hisfather’s death and had made plans for every contingency; itwas just that it never occurred to him that when the timecame he too might be at death’s door.
Having given this summary of everything Cesare Borgia
did, I can’t ﬁnd anything to criticize; on the contrary, and as
I said, I mean to propose him as a model for anyone whocomes to power through fortunate circumstances or with thehelp of another ruler’s armed forces. Given his great determi-
nation and considerable ambitions, Borgia could hardly have
behaved any differently; only the combination of Alexander’s
early death and his own illness prevented him from achievinghis goals. A new ruler who reckons he must ward off enemiesand woo friends, overcome obstacles by force or fraud, havehimself loved and feared by his people, followed and respected
by his soldiers, who must eliminate enemies likely or certain
to attack him, reform old institutions, show himself bothsevere and gracious, generous and spontaneous, break up adisloyal army and build a new one, keep the friendship ofkings and princes so that they support him with deference, or
at least think twice before harming him, will ﬁnd no better
recent example to study than the policies of Cesare Borgia.
The only criticism one can level at him is his role in the
election of Pope Julius. As we’ve said, Borgia wasn’ti na
position to impose the pope he wanted but he did have inﬂu-ence enough to keep out the candidates he didn’t want. Andhe should never have allowed a cardinal whose interests he
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   30 28/05/2015   14:1430 the prince
possible of the College that would elect the next pope; fourth,
win so much territory before the pope died as to be able toresist a ﬁrst attack with his own resources. By the time his
father died he had achieved three of these four goals andwasn’t far off achieving the fourth. He had killed all the localrulers he could get his hands on and hardly anyone hadescaped; he had won over the Roman nobility and he had
enormous inﬂuence over the Electoral College. As far as
extending his territory was concerned, he was aiming to be-come master of all Tuscany, having already captured Perugiaand Piombino and taken Pisa under his protection.
As soon as France’s restraining inﬂuence weakened (actu-
ally, it already had, since, having lost the Kingdom of Naplesto Spain, the French –and the Spanish too for that matter –
now needed Borgia’s support) he would grab Pisa. At thatpoint Lucca and Siena would quickly surrender, partly out offear and partly thanks to their old enmity with Florence, after
which the Florentines would be unable to defend themselves.
If Borgia had managed all this (and he was almost there thevery year Alexander died) he would have accumulated somuch power and prestige that he could have responded toany aggression with his own forces and talent and wouldn’t
have needed to rely on anyone else’s armies or authority. But
Alexander died just ﬁve years after his son had ﬁrst drawn his
sword. Only in Romagna had Borgia consolidated his power;
all his other territorial gains were still shaky. He was isolated,caught between two extremely powerful, hostile armies, and,what’s more, mortally ill.
Borgia was so ruthless and so talented, he knew so well
that you have to win over people or destroy them and he hadbuilt up such solid foundations for his power in such a shorttime that if he hadn’t had these two armies threatening him,or if he hadn’t been so ill, he would have overcome everyobstacle. That the foundations Borgia had built were soundwas soon evident: Romagna waited loyally for more than astates won by lucky circumstance 31
month while he lay half dead in Rome, and in Rome itself no
one took advantage of his weakness; when his enemies, theBaglionis, Vitellis and Orsinis, turned up no one went overto their side. And though Borgia wasn’t able to choose whowould be the new pope, at least he was in a position to blockanyone he didn’t want. So if he had been in good health whenhis father died, everything would have been easy. He himself
told me, in the days when the College was meeting to elect
Julius II, that he had thought over what might happen on hisfather’s death and had made plans for every contingency; itwas just that it never occurred to him that when the timecame he too might be at death’s door.
Having given this summary of everything Cesare Borgia
did, I can’t ﬁnd anything to criticize; on the contrary, and as
I said, I mean to propose him as a model for anyone whocomes to power through fortunate circumstances or with thehelp of another ruler’s armed forces. Given his great determi-
nation and considerable ambitions, Borgia could hardly have
behaved any differently; only the combination of Alexander’s
early death and his own illness prevented him from achievinghis goals. A new ruler who reckons he must ward off enemiesand woo friends, overcome obstacles by force or fraud, havehimself loved and feared by his people, followed and respected
by his soldiers, who must eliminate enemies likely or certain
to attack him, reform old institutions, show himself bothsevere and gracious, generous and spontaneous, break up adisloyal army and build a new one, keep the friendship ofkings and princes so that they support him with deference, or
at least think twice before harming him, will ﬁnd no better
recent example to study than the policies of Cesare Borgia.
The only criticism one can level at him is his role in the
election of Pope Julius. As we’ve said, Borgia wasn’ti na
position to impose the pope he wanted but he did have inﬂu-ence enough to keep out the candidates he didn’t want. Andhe should never have allowed a cardinal whose interests he
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   31 28/05/2015   14:1432 the prince
had damaged, or who as pope would have reason to fear him,
to win the election. Because it’s fear or hatred that makesmen attack each other. The cardinals Borgia had wrongedwere, among others, Giuliano della Rovere, cardinal of SanPietro ad Vincula, Cardinal Colonna, cardinal of San Giorgioof Savona, and Ascanio Sforza. All the others, with the excep-tion of the cardinal of Rouen and the Spanish cardinals, would
have had reason to fear him had they become pope. With the
King of France behind him, the cardinal of Rouen was a verypowerful man, while the Spanish cardinals were related toBorgia and indebted to him. So the best solution for Borgiawas a Spanish pope; failing that, he should have let Rouen
take the throne, but not Giuliano della Rovere. Anyone who
thinks that an important man will forget past grievances justbecause he’s received some new promotion must think again.Borgia miscalculated in this election, and the mistake wasfatal.8
States won by crime
Aside from lucky circumstances and positive qualities, thereare two other ways a private citizen can become a ruler and
we should include them in our discussion, though one of these
would ﬁnd more space in a book about republics. They are,
ﬁrst, when a man seizes power by some terrible crime and,second, when a private citizen becomes hereditary ruler withthe support of his fellow citizens. As for achieving kingshipby crime, we’ll discuss two examples, one from ancient history
and one from modern times, and look no deeper into the
question, since these will be models enough for anyoneobliged to take this course.
Agathocles was a Sicilian. From being a private citizen, one
of the lowest of the low in fact, he became King of Syracuse.
Born a potter’s son, he lived a life of depravity from start to
ﬁnish. All the same, mixed with that depravity were suchexcellent mental and physical qualities that, having joinedthe Syracusan army, he rose through the ranks and eventu-ally became commander-in-chief. Once he’d taken charge,
Agathocles decided to make himself king, using whatever
violence was necessary to keep the power conferred on himas commander without being obliged to anyone. He discussedhis intentions with Hamilcar, a Carthaginian whose army wasthen ﬁghting in Sicily, and reached an agreement with him.
Then one morning he called an assembly of the people andthe Senate as if he had important state business to discuss.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   32 28/05/2015   14:1432 the prince
had damaged, or who as pope would have reason to fear him,
to win the election. Because it’s fear or hatred that makesmen attack each other. The cardinals Borgia had wrongedwere, among others, Giuliano della Rovere, cardinal of SanPietro ad Vincula, Cardinal Colonna, cardinal of San Giorgioof Savona, and Ascanio Sforza. All the others, with the excep-tion of the cardinal of Rouen and the Spanish cardinals, would
have had reason to fear him had they become pope. With the
King of France behind him, the cardinal of Rouen was a verypowerful man, while the Spanish cardinals were related toBorgia and indebted to him. So the best solution for Borgiawas a Spanish pope; failing that, he should have let Rouen
take the throne, but not Giuliano della Rovere. Anyone who
thinks that an important man will forget past grievances justbecause he’s received some new promotion must think again.Borgia miscalculated in this election, and the mistake wasfatal.8
States won by crime
Aside from lucky circumstances and positive qualities, there
are two other ways a private citizen can become a ruler and
we should include them in our discussion, though one of these
would ﬁnd more space in a book about republics. They are,
ﬁrst, when a man seizes power by some terrible crime and,second, when a private citizen becomes hereditary ruler withthe support of his fellow citizens. As for achieving kingshipby crime, we’ll discuss two examples, one from ancient history
and one from modern times, and look no deeper into the
question, since these will be models enough for anyoneobliged to take this course.
Agathocles was a Sicilian. From being a private citizen, one
of the lowest of the low in fact, he became King of Syracuse.
Born a potter’s son, he lived a life of depravity from start to
ﬁnish. All the same, mixed with that depravity were suchexcellent mental and physical qualities that, having joinedthe Syracusan army, he rose through the ranks and eventu-ally became commander-in-chief. Once he’d taken charge,
Agathocles decided to make himself king, using whatever
violence was necessary to keep the power conferred on himas commander without being obliged to anyone. He discussedhis intentions with Hamilcar, a Carthaginian whose army wasthen ﬁghting in Sicily, and reached an agreement with him.
Then one morning he called an assembly of the people andthe Senate as if he had important state business to discuss.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   33 28/05/2015   14:1434 the prince
At a prearranged signal his soldiers moved in and killed all
the senators and richest men in town. After this massacreAgathocles became King of Syracuse and held his thronewithout any resistance from the people. Twice defeated bythe Carthaginians and then actually besieged, not only did hemanage to defend his town but, leaving some men behind toresist the siege, he led the rest out of Syracuse to attack Africa.
The siege was lifted and the Carthaginians pushed to the brink
of collapse, at which point they accepted an agreement whichallowed them to keep Africa and left Sicily to Agathocles.
Looking at Agathocles’ life and achievements, you won’t
ﬁnd much that can be attributed to luck. As I said, he had no
backers or benefactors when he took power but rose through
the ranks, surviving all kinds of hardships and dangers. Andwhen he’d got power he knew how to take tough, dangerousdecisions to hold on to it. On the other hand, we can hardlydescribe killing fellow citizens, betraying friends and living
without loyalty, mercy or creed as signs of talent. Methods
like that may bring you power, but not glory. If you considerAgathocles’ ability to take risks and come out on top, and his
remarkable spirit when it came to facing and overcomingobstacles, it’s hard to see why he isn’t rated as highly as themost outstanding military leaders. But his brutality, cruelty
and inhumanity, together with the endless crimes he com-
mitted, mean he has no place among the men we most admire.In conclusion, we can’t attribute Agathocles’ achievements to
luck or to positive qualities, since he needed neither.
In our own times, we have the example of Oliverotto, a
man from the town of Fermo who lived during the papacy ofAlexander VI. Orphaned of his father while still very young,Oliverotto was brought up by his uncle, Giovanni Fogliani,who had him join the army under Paulo Vitelli in the hopethat, with military discipline, he would rise to a high rank. OnPaulo’s death, Oliverotto served under his brother, Vitellozzo,and being very capable, with a strong personality and power-states won by crime 35
ful physique, he soon became the army’s top man. But sincehe felt that working with others was demeaning, he decidedto take Fermo for himself. Having got the support of some ofthe town’s citizens, people who preferred to see their cityenslaved rather than free, and with the backing of Vitellozzo,he wrote to Giovanni Fogliani saying that now so many yearshad gone by he was eager to come home and see his uncle
again, visit the town, and check over some of his property.
And since, he wrote, he’d been working hard for nothing butthe prestige of his position, he wanted to ride into town instyle with a hundred mounted friends and servants besidehim; that way his fellow citizens would see that he hadn’t been
wasting his time. And he asked his uncle please to arrange for
the people of Fermo to organize an appropriate reception,something that would not only honour him but also his uncle,who had brought him up.
Giovanni spared no effort to do his nephew proud and,
after the people of Fermo had given him a formal reception,Oliverotto was welcomed into his uncle’s house. A few dayslater, having used the time to make secret arrangements forthe crime he was planning, he threw an impressive banquetto which he invited Giovanni Fogliani and all the town’sleading men. After they’d ﬁnished eating and sat through all
the entertainments you get on these occasions, Oliverottoslyly launched into some weighty reﬂections on the powerand achievements of Pope Alexander and his son CesareBorgia. When Giovanni and the others joined the conver-sation, Oliverotto suddenly got to his feet and said these were
matters best discussed in a more private place and he headed
for another room with Giovanni and all the other citizenstrailing after him. They had barely sat down beforeOliverotto’s soldiers rushed out of their hiding places andkilled the lot of them.
After the massacre, Oliverotto got on his horse, rode round
the town and surrounded the chief magistrate in the state
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   34 28/05/2015   14:1434 the prince
At a prearranged signal his soldiers moved in and killed all
the senators and richest men in town. After this massacreAgathocles became King of Syracuse and held his thronewithout any resistance from the people. Twice defeated bythe Carthaginians and then actually besieged, not only did hemanage to defend his town but, leaving some men behind toresist the siege, he led the rest out of Syracuse to attack Africa.
The siege was lifted and the Carthaginians pushed to the brink
of collapse, at which point they accepted an agreement whichallowed them to keep Africa and left Sicily to Agathocles.
Looking at Agathocles’ life and achievements, you won’t
ﬁnd much that can be attributed to luck. As I said, he had no
backers or benefactors when he took power but rose through
the ranks, surviving all kinds of hardships and dangers. Andwhen he’d got power he knew how to take tough, dangerousdecisions to hold on to it. On the other hand, we can hardlydescribe killing fellow citizens, betraying friends and living
without loyalty, mercy or creed as signs of talent. Methods
like that may bring you power, but not glory. If you considerAgathocles’ ability to take risks and come out on top, and his
remarkable spirit when it came to facing and overcomingobstacles, it’s hard to see why he isn’t rated as highly as themost outstanding military leaders. But his brutality, cruelty
and inhumanity, together with the endless crimes he com-
mitted, mean he has no place among the men we most admire.In conclusion, we can’t attribute Agathocles’ achievements to
luck or to positive qualities, since he needed neither.
In our own times, we have the example of Oliverotto, a
man from the town of Fermo who lived during the papacy ofAlexander VI. Orphaned of his father while still very young,Oliverotto was brought up by his uncle, Giovanni Fogliani,who had him join the army under Paulo Vitelli in the hopethat, with military discipline, he would rise to a high rank. OnPaulo’s death, Oliverotto served under his brother, Vitellozzo,and being very capable, with a strong personality and power-states won by crime 35
ful physique, he soon became the army’s top man. But since
he felt that working with others was demeaning, he decidedto take Fermo for himself. Having got the support of some ofthe town’s citizens, people who preferred to see their cityenslaved rather than free, and with the backing of Vitellozzo,he wrote to Giovanni Fogliani saying that now so many yearshad gone by he was eager to come home and see his uncle
again, visit the town, and check over some of his property.
And since, he wrote, he’d been working hard for nothing butthe prestige of his position, he wanted to ride into town instyle with a hundred mounted friends and servants besidehim; that way his fellow citizens would see that he hadn’t been
wasting his time. And he asked his uncle please to arrange for
the people of Fermo to organize an appropriate reception,something that would not only honour him but also his uncle,who had brought him up.
Giovanni spared no effort to do his nephew proud and,
after the people of Fermo had given him a formal reception,Oliverotto was welcomed into his uncle’s house. A few dayslater, having used the time to make secret arrangements forthe crime he was planning, he threw an impressive banquetto which he invited Giovanni Fogliani and all the town’sleading men. After they’d ﬁnished eating and sat through all
the entertainments you get on these occasions, Oliverottoslyly launched into some weighty reﬂections on the powerand achievements of Pope Alexander and his son CesareBorgia. When Giovanni and the others joined the conver-sation, Oliverotto suddenly got to his feet and said these were
matters best discussed in a more private place and he headed
for another room with Giovanni and all the other citizenstrailing after him. They had barely sat down beforeOliverotto’s soldiers rushed out of their hiding places andkilled the lot of them.
After the massacre, Oliverotto got on his horse, rode round
the town and surrounded the chief magistrate in the state
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   35 28/05/2015   14:1436 the prince
palace, with the result that people were forced to do what he
said and set up a government with Oliverotto as the ruler.Having killed everyone who opposed the coup and might hitback, he strengthened his position by setting up a new armyand new civil institutions, so that within the year he was notonly undisputed master of Fermo but also a serious threat tothe neighbouring towns. And as with Agathocles, it would
have been very hard to unseat Oliverotto, had he not let
himself be fooled by Cesare Borgia, when, as explained earlieron, Borgia lured the Orsini and Vitelli men to Senigallia.Oliverotto went with them and so, just a year after killinghis uncle, he was strangled along with Vitellozzo Vitelli, his
mentor in courage and crime.
You might well wonder how on earth, after all their count-
less betrayals and cruelties, men like Agathocles could sit safe
on their thrones for years and even defend themselves againstforeign enemies without their citizens ever conspiring against
them; and this while many others, equally ready to use cruelty,
weren’t even able to hold on to their power in peacetime,never mind in war. I think it’s a question of whether crueltyis well or badly used. Cruelty well used (if we can ever speakwell of something bad) is short-lived and decisive, no morethan is necessary to secure your position and then stop; you
don’t go on being cruel but use the power it has given you to
deliver maximum beneﬁts to your subjects. Cruelty is badlyused when you’re not drastic enough at the beginning butgrow increasingly cruel later on, rather than easing off. Aleader who takes the ﬁrst approach has a chance, like Aga-
thocles, of improving his position with his subjects and withGod too; go the other way and you have no chance at all.
It’s worth noting that when you take hold of a state, you
must assess how much violence and cruelty will be necessaryand get it over with at once, so as not to have to be cruel ona regular basis. When you’ve stopped using violence yoursubjects will be reassured and you can then win them overstates won by crime 37
with generosity. If you don’t do all it takes at the beginning,because you were badly advised or didn’t have the nerve, thenyou’ll always have to be wielding the knife; and you’ll neverbe able to count on your subjects, since with all the violenceyou’re handing out they won’t be able to count on you. So
get the violence over with as soon as possible; that way there’llbe less time for people to taste its bitterness and they’ll be less
hostile. Favours, on the other hand, should be given out
slowly, one by one, so that they can be properly savoured.Most of all, though, a ruler should have the kind of relation-ship with his subjects where nothing that can happen, goodor bad, will force him to change his approach, because if hard
times demand it, your cruelty will come too late, while any
concessions you make will be seen as wrung out of you andno one will be impressed.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   36 28/05/2015   14:1436 the prince
palace, with the result that people were forced to do what he
said and set up a government with Oliverotto as the ruler.Having killed everyone who opposed the coup and might hitback, he strengthened his position by setting up a new armyand new civil institutions, so that within the year he was notonly undisputed master of Fermo but also a serious threat tothe neighbouring towns. And as with Agathocles, it would
have been very hard to unseat Oliverotto, had he not let
himself be fooled by Cesare Borgia, when, as explained earlieron, Borgia lured the Orsini and Vitelli men to Senigallia.Oliverotto went with them and so, just a year after killinghis uncle, he was strangled along with Vitellozzo Vitelli, his
mentor in courage and crime.
You might well wonder how on earth, after all their count-
less betrayals and cruelties, men like Agathocles could sit safe
on their thrones for years and even defend themselves againstforeign enemies without their citizens ever conspiring against
them; and this while many others, equally ready to use cruelty,
weren’t even able to hold on to their power in peacetime,never mind in war. I think it’s a question of whether crueltyis well or badly used. Cruelty well used (if we can ever speakwell of something bad) is short-lived and decisive, no morethan is necessary to secure your position and then stop; you
don’t go on being cruel but use the power it has given you to
deliver maximum beneﬁts to your subjects. Cruelty is badlyused when you’re not drastic enough at the beginning butgrow increasingly cruel later on, rather than easing off. Aleader who takes the ﬁrst approach has a chance, like Aga-
thocles, of improving his position with his subjects and withGod too; go the other way and you have no chance at all.
It’s worth noting that when you take hold of a state, you
must assess how much violence and cruelty will be necessaryand get it over with at once, so as not to have to be cruel ona regular basis. When you’ve stopped using violence yoursubjects will be reassured and you can then win them overstates won by crime 37
with generosity. If you don’t do all it takes at the beginning,
because you were badly advised or didn’t have the nerve, thenyou’ll always have to be wielding the knife; and you’ll neverbe able to count on your subjects, since with all the violenceyou’re handing out they won’t be able to count on you. Soget the violence over with as soon as possible; that way there’ll
be less time for people to taste its bitterness and they’ll be less
hostile. Favours, on the other hand, should be given out
slowly, one by one, so that they can be properly savoured.Most of all, though, a ruler should have the kind of relation-ship with his subjects where nothing that can happen, goodor bad, will force him to change his approach, because if hard
times demand it, your cruelty will come too late, while any
concessions you make will be seen as wrung out of you andno one will be impressed.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   37 28/05/2015   14:149
Monarchy with public support
Now let’s turn to our second case, where a private citizen
becomes king in his own country not by crime or unacceptable
violence, but with the support of his fellow-citizens. We can
call this a monarchy with public support and to become itsking you don’t have to be wholly brilliant or extraordinarilylucky, just shrewd in a lucky way. Obviously, to take controlof this kind of state you need the support of either the commonpeople or the wealthy families, the nobles. In every city one
ﬁnds these two conﬂicting political positions: there are the
common people who are eager not to be ordered around and
oppressed by the noble families, and there are the nobles whoare eager to oppress the common people and order themaround. These opposing impulses will lead to one of three
different situations: a monarchy, a republic, or anarchy.
A monarchy can be brought about either by the common
people or the nobles, when one or the other party ﬁnds it
convenient. Seeing that they can’t control the people, the
wealthy families begin to concentrate prestige on one of their
number and make him king so as to be able to get what they
want in his shadow. Likewise, the people, seeing that theycan’t resist the power of the nobles, concentrate prestige onone citizen and make him king so that his authority willprotect them. A king who comes to power with the help ofthe rich nobles will have more trouble keeping it than theking who gets there with the support of the people, becausemonarchy with public support 39
he will be surrounded by men who consider themselves hisequals, and that will make it hard for him to give them ordersor to manage affairs as he wants.
But a man coming to power with the support of the
common people holds it alone and has no one, or hardlyanyone, around him who’s unwilling to obey. What’s more,
you can’t in good faith give the nobles what they want without
doing harm to others; but you can with the people. Because
the people’s aspirations are more honourable than those ofthe nobles: the nobles want to oppress the people, while thepeople want to be free from oppression. What’s more, a kingcan never be safe if the common people are hostile to him,
because there are so many of them; but he can protect himself
against the nobles, since there are not so many. The worst aking can expect if the people turn hostile is that they willdesert him; but when the nobles turn against him, he hasto fear not only desertion, but a direct attack. The nobles are
smarter, they see further ahead, they always move early
enough to save their skins, ingratiating themselves with who-ever they think will turn out the winner. Then, of necessity, aking will always have to live with the same common people;but he can perfectly well get by without the same nobles, sincehe can make and unmake noblemen every day, giving and
taking away honours as he likes.
Let’s settle this question of the nobles. As I see it, they can
be divided for the most part into two categories: either they
behave in such a way as to tie themselves entirely to yourdestiny, or they don’t. Those who do tie themselves and aren’t
greedy should be honoured and loved; the ones who don’tcan be further divided into two groups. Maybe they areanxious men, naturally lacking in character, in which caseyou’d better make use of them, especially the ones with goodadvice to offer, since when things are going well they’ll respectyou and when things are tough you needn’t fear them; but ifthey’re hanging back out of calculation and ambition that’sa
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   38 28/05/2015   14:149
Monarchy with public support
Now let’s turn to our second case, where a private citizen
becomes king in his own country not by crime or unacceptable
violence, but with the support of his fellow-citizens. We can
call this a monarchy with public support and to become itsking you don’t have to be wholly brilliant or extraordinarilylucky, just shrewd in a lucky way. Obviously, to take controlof this kind of state you need the support of either the commonpeople or the wealthy families, the nobles. In every city one
ﬁnds these two conﬂicting political positions: there are the
common people who are eager not to be ordered around and
oppressed by the noble families, and there are the nobles whoare eager to oppress the common people and order themaround. These opposing impulses will lead to one of three
different situations: a monarchy, a republic, or anarchy.
A monarchy can be brought about either by the common
people or the nobles, when one or the other party ﬁnds it
convenient. Seeing that they can’t control the people, the
wealthy families begin to concentrate prestige on one of their
number and make him king so as to be able to get what they
want in his shadow. Likewise, the people, seeing that theycan’t resist the power of the nobles, concentrate prestige onone citizen and make him king so that his authority willprotect them. A king who comes to power with the help ofthe rich nobles will have more trouble keeping it than theking who gets there with the support of the people, becausemonarchy with public support 39
he will be surrounded by men who consider themselves his
equals, and that will make it hard for him to give them ordersor to manage affairs as he wants.
But a man coming to power with the support of the
common people holds it alone and has no one, or hardlyanyone, around him who’s unwilling to obey. What’s more,
you can’t in good faith give the nobles what they want without
doing harm to others; but you can with the people. Because
the people’s aspirations are more honourable than those ofthe nobles: the nobles want to oppress the people, while thepeople want to be free from oppression. What’s more, a kingcan never be safe if the common people are hostile to him,
because there are so many of them; but he can protect himself
against the nobles, since there are not so many. The worst aking can expect if the people turn hostile is that they willdesert him; but when the nobles turn against him, he hasto fear not only desertion, but a direct attack. The nobles are
smarter, they see further ahead, they always move early
enough to save their skins, ingratiating themselves with who-ever they think will turn out the winner. Then, of necessity, aking will always have to live with the same common people;but he can perfectly well get by without the same nobles, sincehe can make and unmake noblemen every day, giving and
taking away honours as he likes.
Let’s settle this question of the nobles. As I see it, they can
be divided for the most part into two categories: either they
behave in such a way as to tie themselves entirely to yourdestiny, or they don’t. Those who do tie themselves and aren’t
greedy should be honoured and loved; the ones who don’tcan be further divided into two groups. Maybe they areanxious men, naturally lacking in character, in which caseyou’d better make use of them, especially the ones with goodadvice to offer, since when things are going well they’ll respectyou and when things are tough you needn’t fear them; but ifthey’re hanging back out of calculation and ambition that’sa
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   39 28/05/2015   14:1440 the prince
sign they’re looking more to their own interests than to yours.
These are the ones you have to watch out for and guardagainst as if they were already declared enemies, because,inevitably, when things start going wrong, these men will beworking to bring you down.
A man who becomes king with the support of the people,
then, must keep those people on his side. This is easy enough
since all they want is to be free from oppression. But the man
who becomes king against the will of the majority and withthe support of the wealthy nobles must make it an absolutepriority to win over the affection of the common people. Thiswill be easy if he takes them under his protection. When
people are treated well by someone they thought was hostile
they respond with even greater loyalty; they’ll go over to hisside at once and be even more devoted than if he had takenpower with their support. There are all kinds of ways a kingcan win the people’s affection, but since these depend on
particular circumstances and one can hardly lay down rules,
I’ll leave them out of our discussion. I’ll just conclude, then,that a ruler must have the people on his side; otherwise whenthings get tough there’ll be no way out.
Nabis, the Spartan king, was besieged by forces from all
over Greece plus a hugely successful Roman army, but he
held out and defended his country and his position against
the lot of them. All he had to do when danger threatened wastake precautions to deal with a few internal enemies, but ifhe’d had the people against him, this wouldn’t have beenenough. And if anyone objects to my reasoning here with that
trite proverb: the man who builds his house on the people is
building on mud, my answer is that this is true if it’s a privatecitizen doing the building and imagining the people will cometo his rescue when he’s in trouble with the law or his enemies.Men like this usually ﬁnd themselves being let down, as did
the Gracchi brothers in Rome and Giorgio Scali in Florence.But when it’s a king building on the people, and when he’samonarchy with public support 41
man of spirit who knows how to lead and doesn’t panic whenthings get tough, a man who takes the right precautions andwhose personality and style of government keeps everybodyin a positive state of mind, then the people will never let himdown and time will show what solid foundations he laid.
This kind of ruler is most at risk when passing from publicly
supported leadership to absolute rule. At this point he either
commands directly himself or gives orders by proxy through
magistrates. If he’s ruling by proxy he’ll be weaker andexposed to greater risks, since he now depends entirely on thegood will of the men appointed as magistrates and they canvery easily strip him of his power, particularly when times are
hard, either by attacking him directly or by just not carrying
out his orders. Once the trouble has begun, the ruler won’t
have time to take absolute command himself because hiscitizens and subjects will be used to taking orders from magis-trates and they aren’t going to start obeying him in a moment
of crisis; so when he’s up against it, he’ll always be struggling
toﬁnd anyone he can trust. A ruler in this position mustn’t
count on what he sees when things are going well and thecitizens need his government. Then everybody comes running,everyone is promising this and that, everyone is ready to diefor him, since there is no question of dying. But when things
get tough and it’s the government that needs the citizens,
then hardly anyone shows. And what’s so dangerous about acritical moment like this is that you only get one shot at it. Soif he’s sensible the ruler must work out a situation wherehis citizens will always need both his government and him,
however well or badly things are going. Then they will always
be loyal.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   40 28/05/2015   14:1440 the prince
sign they’re looking more to their own interests than to yours.
These are the ones you have to watch out for and guardagainst as if they were already declared enemies, because,inevitably, when things start going wrong, these men will beworking to bring you down.
A man who becomes king with the support of the people,
then, must keep those people on his side. This is easy enough
since all they want is to be free from oppression. But the man
who becomes king against the will of the majority and withthe support of the wealthy nobles must make it an absolutepriority to win over the affection of the common people. Thiswill be easy if he takes them under his protection. When
people are treated well by someone they thought was hostile
they respond with even greater loyalty; they’ll go over to hisside at once and be even more devoted than if he had takenpower with their support. There are all kinds of ways a kingcan win the people’s affection, but since these depend on
particular circumstances and one can hardly lay down rules,
I’ll leave them out of our discussion. I’ll just conclude, then,that a ruler must have the people on his side; otherwise whenthings get tough there’ll be no way out.
Nabis, the Spartan king, was besieged by forces from all
over Greece plus a hugely successful Roman army, but he
held out and defended his country and his position against
the lot of them. All he had to do when danger threatened wastake precautions to deal with a few internal enemies, but ifhe’d had the people against him, this wouldn’t have beenenough. And if anyone objects to my reasoning here with that
trite proverb: the man who builds his house on the people is
building on mud, my answer is that this is true if it’s a privatecitizen doing the building and imagining the people will cometo his rescue when he’s in trouble with the law or his enemies.
Men like this usually ﬁnd themselves being let down, as did
the Gracchi brothers in Rome and Giorgio Scali in Florence.But when it’s a king building on the people, and when he’samonarchy with public support 41
man of spirit who knows how to lead and doesn’t panic when
things get tough, a man who takes the right precautions andwhose personality and style of government keeps everybodyin a positive state of mind, then the people will never let himdown and time will show what solid foundations he laid.
This kind of ruler is most at risk when passing from publicly
supported leadership to absolute rule. At this point he either
commands directly himself or gives orders by proxy through
magistrates. If he’s ruling by proxy he’ll be weaker andexposed to greater risks, since he now depends entirely on thegood will of the men appointed as magistrates and they canvery easily strip him of his power, particularly when times are
hard, either by attacking him directly or by just not carrying
out his orders. Once the trouble has begun, the ruler won’thave time to take absolute command himself because hiscitizens and subjects will be used to taking orders from magis-trates and they aren’t going to start obeying him in a moment
of crisis; so when he’s up against it, he’ll always be struggling
toﬁnd anyone he can trust. A ruler in this position mustn’t
count on what he sees when things are going well and the
citizens need his government. Then everybody comes running,everyone is promising this and that, everyone is ready to diefor him, since there is no question of dying. But when things
get tough and it’s the government that needs the citizens,
then hardly anyone shows. And what’s so dangerous about acritical moment like this is that you only get one shot at it. Soif he’s sensible the ruler must work out a situation wherehis citizens will always need both his government and him,
however well or badly things are going. Then they will always
be loyal.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   41 28/05/2015   14:1410
Assessing a state’s strength
When looking at the nature of these various states one
important question to ask is: if attacked, does a ruler have
sufﬁcient power to defend himself with his own resources, or
will he always have to rely on the protection of others? Tomake the question more precise, let’s say that a ruler whohas enough men or enough money to put together an armythat can take on all comers is, by my deﬁnition, capableof defending himself, while a ruler who can’t take on an
enemy in the ﬁeld but has to withdraw behind his city
walls and defend those, is one who will always be in need of
outside help. We’ve already said something about the ﬁrst
kind of ruler [Chapter 6] and later on there’ll be more
[Chapters 11–13]. As for the second kind, one can only
encourage them to fortify their home towns and keep themwell supplied, while leaving the surrounding countrysideentirely to its fate. If a ruler has built good fortiﬁcations andmanaged his relationship with his subjects as suggested aboveand further elaborated in the following pages, his enemies
will always think twice before attacking him. People are
always wary of projects that present obvious difﬁculties, andattacking a well-defended town and a ruler whose subjectsdon’t hate him is never an easy proposition.
German cities are completely independent, don’t have much
territory around them and obey the emperor only when itsuits. They are not afraid of him, nor of any other powerfulassessing a state’ s strength 43
rulers in the area. This is because these towns are so wellfortiﬁed that everyone realizes what an arduous, wearisomebusiness it would be to attack them. They all have properlysized moats and walls; they have the necessary artillery; theyhave public warehouses with food, drink and ﬁrewood for a
year; what’s more, to keep people well fed without draining
the public purse, they stock materials for a year’s worth of
work in whatever trades are the lifeblood of the city and
whatever jobs the common folk earn their keep with. Theyhold military exercises in high regard and make all kinds ofarrangements to make sure they’re routinely practised.
So, a ruler whose city is well fortiﬁed and who doesn’t
inspire hatred among his subjects isn’t going to be attacked,and even if he is, his attackers will leave humiliated, becausethe world is such a changeable place that it’s almost impos-sible to keep an army camped outside a city’s walls doingnothing for a whole year. Someone will object: what if people
have houses outside the walls and see them being burned
down; won’t they get impatient; won’t the long siege and theirworries for their own futures make them forget their ruler?My answer is that a leader with power and personality willalways get round problems like this; he can raise hopes thatthe siege won’t last long; he can frighten people with stories
about the enemy’s cruelty; he can move quickly to block
anyone who seems too hot-headed. Aside from this, it’s obvi-ous that the enemy is going to be burning and razing thecountryside as he approaches the town at a time when peopleare still enthusiastic and determined to resist. This actually
gives the ruler less cause for concern, because a few days later,
when hearts are cooling, the damage is already done, the blowstruck, and there’s no way back. As a result, people will rallyround their ruler all the more, they’ll see him as indebted to
them because their houses have been burned and their prop-erty destroyed in his defence. It’s human nature to tie yourselfto a leader as much for the services you’ve done him as the
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   42 28/05/2015   14:1410
Assessing a state’s strength
When looking at the nature of these various states one
important question to ask is: if attacked, does a ruler have
sufﬁcient power to defend himself with his own resources, or
will he always have to rely on the protection of others? Tomake the question more precise, let’s say that a ruler whohas enough men or enough money to put together an armythat can take on all comers is, by my deﬁnition, capableof defending himself, while a ruler who can’t take on an
enemy in the ﬁeld but has to withdraw behind his city
walls and defend those, is one who will always be in need of
outside help. We’ve already said something about the ﬁrst
kind of ruler [Chapter 6] and later on there’ll be more
[Chapters 11–13]. As for the second kind, one can only
encourage them to fortify their home towns and keep themwell supplied, while leaving the surrounding countrysideentirely to its fate. If a ruler has built good fortiﬁcations andmanaged his relationship with his subjects as suggested aboveand further elaborated in the following pages, his enemies
will always think twice before attacking him. People are
always wary of projects that present obvious difﬁculties, andattacking a well-defended town and a ruler whose subjectsdon’t hate him is never an easy proposition.
German cities are completely independent, don’t have much
territory around them and obey the emperor only when itsuits. They are not afraid of him, nor of any other powerfulassessing a state’ s strength 43
rulers in the area. This is because these towns are so well
fortiﬁed that everyone realizes what an arduous, wearisomebusiness it would be to attack them. They all have properlysized moats and walls; they have the necessary artillery; theyhave public warehouses with food, drink and ﬁrewood for a
year; what’s more, to keep people well fed without drainingthe public purse, they stock materials for a year’s worth of
work in whatever trades are the lifeblood of the city andwhatever jobs the common folk earn their keep with. Theyhold military exercises in high regard and make all kinds ofarrangements to make sure they’re routinely practised.
So, a ruler whose city is well fortiﬁed and who doesn’t
inspire hatred among his subjects isn’t going to be attacked,and even if he is, his attackers will leave humiliated, becausethe world is such a changeable place that it’s almost impos-sible to keep an army camped outside a city’s walls doingnothing for a whole year. Someone will object: what if people
have houses outside the walls and see them being burned
down; won’t they get impatient; won’t the long siege and theirworries for their own futures make them forget their ruler?My answer is that a leader with power and personality willalways get round problems like this; he can raise hopes thatthe siege won’t last long; he can frighten people with stories
about the enemy’s cruelty; he can move quickly to block
anyone who seems too hot-headed. Aside from this, it’s obvi-
ous that the enemy is going to be burning and razing thecountryside as he approaches the town at a time when peopleare still enthusiastic and determined to resist. This actually
gives the ruler less cause for concern, because a few days later,
when hearts are cooling, the damage is already done, the blowstruck, and there’s no way back. As a result, people will rallyround their ruler all the more, they’ll see him as indebted tothem because their houses have been burned and their prop-erty destroyed in his defence. It’s human nature to tie yourselfto a leader as much for the services you’ve done him as the
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   43 28/05/2015   14:1444 the prince
good he’s done you. Hence, when you think about it, if the
ruler is sensible, it won’t be that hard to keep people solidthroughout the siege, so long as they have food to eat andweapons to defend themselves. 11
Church states
The last kind of state we have to look at is the Church state.In this case all the difﬁculties an eventual ruler must face come
before he takes power; because while you need ability or luck
to take a state like this you can hold on to it without either.Church states are upheld by ancient religious institutions thatare so strong and well established as to keep their rulers inpower no matter what they do or how they live. Only Churchleaders possess states without defending them and subjects
without governing them. And even when undefended their
states are not taken off them; even when left ungoverned theirsubjects don’t rebel; they don’t think about changing rulerand wouldn’t be able to anyway. So this is the only form ofgovernment that is secure and relaxed.
But since Church states depend on forces beyond the reach
of human reason, I shall say no more about them. God createdthem and sustains them and it would be rash and presump-tuous for a mere man to discuss them. All the same, if someonewere to ask me how the Church has increased its temporal
power so dramatically in recent times, progressing from a
situation prior to Pope Alexander where even the most insig-niﬁcant rulers of Italy hardly rated the Church at all in tem-poral terms to one where a pope can scare the King of Francehimself and chase him out of Italy and crush the Venetians,then I think it would be worthwhile sorting out the facts forthe record, however well known they may already be.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   44 28/05/2015   14:1444 the prince
good he’s done you. Hence, when you think about it, if the
ruler is sensible, it won’t be that hard to keep people solidthroughout the siege, so long as they have food to eat andweapons to defend themselves. 11
Church states
The last kind of state we have to look at is the Church state.
In this case all the difﬁculties an eventual ruler must face come
before he takes power; because while you need ability or luck
to take a state like this you can hold on to it without either.Church states are upheld by ancient religious institutions thatare so strong and well established as to keep their rulers inpower no matter what they do or how they live. Only Churchleaders possess states without defending them and subjects
without governing them. And even when undefended their
states are not taken off them; even when left ungoverned theirsubjects don’t rebel; they don’t think about changing rulerand wouldn’t be able to anyway. So this is the only form ofgovernment that is secure and relaxed.
But since Church states depend on forces beyond the reach
of human reason, I shall say no more about them. God createdthem and sustains them and it would be rash and presump-tuous for a mere man to discuss them. All the same, if someonewere to ask me how the Church has increased its temporal
power so dramatically in recent times, progressing from a
situation prior to Pope Alexander where even the most insig-niﬁcant rulers of Italy hardly rated the Church at all in tem-poral terms to one where a pope can scare the King of Francehimself and chase him out of Italy and crush the Venetians,then I think it would be worthwhile sorting out the facts forthe record, however well known they may already be.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   45 28/05/2015   14:1446 the prince
Before Charles, King of France, came down into Italy, the
country was controlled by the pope, the Venetians, the King
of Naples, the Duke of Milan and the Florentines. Necessarily,these powerful states had two main concerns: to keep foreignarmies out of Italy and to prevent each other from grabbingmore territory. The pope and the Venetians were the mosteager expansionists. The only way to hold back the Venetians
was for all the other states to band together, as they did in
the defence of Ferrara; to frustrate the pope, on the otherhand, they relied on the Roman barons. Since these baronswere divided into two factions, the Orsinis and the Colonnas,they always had something to ﬁght about, and with their
swords drawn under the pope’s nose they kept him weak andindecisive. And though from time to time you might get areally determined pope, like Sixtus, all the same he was neverquite cunning enough or lucky enough to solve the problem.The reason was that papacies tended to be short-lived. In the
ten years, on average, that a pope was in power he might just
manage to beat down one of the two factions; but if, forexample, one pope had almost ﬁnished off the Colonnas,
the next would be hostile to the Orsinis and so resurrect theColonnas, but without quite having the time to see off theOrsinis. This is why the Italian states did not rate the pope’s
temporal power very highly.
Then came Alexander VI, who more than any other pope
in history showed what could be done with ﬁnance and force
of arms. Using Valentino Borgia and taking advantage of the
intrusions of the French, he made all the gains I mentioned in
my discussion of Duke Valentino. And though Alexander’s
aim was to make his son great, not the Church, all the samehis achievements enhanced the power of the Church, which,after his and then Valentino’s death, inherited his conquests.So on his election Pope Julius took over a Church that nowpossessed the whole of Romagna and was all the more power-ful because Alexander had quashed the Roman barons andchurch states 47
their factions. He also found a new way of increasing Churchincome which had never been used before.*
Julius not only followed Alexander’s lead, but went further.
He aimed to take Bologna, defeat the Venetians and push theFrench out of Italy. In the end all three goals were achievedand Julius’s credit was the greater because he did it for theglory of the Church, not out of private interest. He kept the
Orsini and Colonna factions in the same reduced state he
found them in, and, though one or two of their leaders triedto change things, two obstacles held them back: the ﬁrst was
the Church’s power, which unnerved them, and the secondwas the fact that they had no cardinals. Cardinals are always a
cause of internal division; when they have their own cardinals,
these factions are never quiet, because the cardinals feed partyanimosity both inside and outside Rome and the barons areforced to come to their party’s defence. So it’s the ambition
of the cardinals that prompts hostility and conﬂict between
the barons. On Julius’s death, his Holiness Pope Leo found
the papacy in an extremely strong position and it is to behoped that while his predecessors made the Church great byarmed force, he can make it even greater and more praise-worthy thanks to his goodness and many, many other virtues.
* The sale of Church beneﬁces and indulgences.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   46 28/05/2015   14:1446 the prince
Before Charles, King of France, came down into Italy, the
country was controlled by the pope, the Venetians, the King
of Naples, the Duke of Milan and the Florentines. Necessarily,these powerful states had two main concerns: to keep foreignarmies out of Italy and to prevent each other from grabbingmore territory. The pope and the Venetians were the mosteager expansionists. The only way to hold back the Venetians
was for all the other states to band together, as they did in
the defence of Ferrara; to frustrate the pope, on the otherhand, they relied on the Roman barons. Since these baronswere divided into two factions, the Orsinis and the Colonnas,they always had something to ﬁght about, and with their
swords drawn under the pope’s nose they kept him weak andindecisive. And though from time to time you might get areally determined pope, like Sixtus, all the same he was neverquite cunning enough or lucky enough to solve the problem.The reason was that papacies tended to be short-lived. In the
ten years, on average, that a pope was in power he might just
manage to beat down one of the two factions; but if, forexample, one pope had almost ﬁnished off the Colonnas,
the next would be hostile to the Orsinis and so resurrect theColonnas, but without quite having the time to see off theOrsinis. This is why the Italian states did not rate the pope’s
temporal power very highly.
Then came Alexander VI, who more than any other pope
in history showed what could be done with ﬁnance and force
of arms. Using Valentino Borgia and taking advantage of the
intrusions of the French, he made all the gains I mentioned in
my discussion of Duke Valentino. And though Alexander’s
aim was to make his son great, not the Church, all the samehis achievements enhanced the power of the Church, which,after his and then Valentino’s death, inherited his conquests.
So on his election Pope Julius took over a Church that nowpossessed the whole of Romagna and was all the more power-ful because Alexander had quashed the Roman barons andchurch states 47
their factions. He also found a new way of increasing Church
income which had never been used before.*
Julius not only followed Alexander’s lead, but went further.
He aimed to take Bologna, defeat the Venetians and push theFrench out of Italy. In the end all three goals were achievedand Julius’s credit was the greater because he did it for the
glory of the Church, not out of private interest. He kept the
Orsini and Colonna factions in the same reduced state he
found them in, and, though one or two of their leaders triedto change things, two obstacles held them back: the ﬁrst was
the Church’s power, which unnerved them, and the secondwas the fact that they had no cardinals. Cardinals are always a
cause of internal division; when they have their own cardinals,
these factions are never quiet, because the cardinals feed partyanimosity both inside and outside Rome and the barons areforced to come to their party’s defence. So it’s the ambition
of the cardinals that prompts hostility and conﬂict between
the barons. On Julius’s death, his Holiness Pope Leo found
the papacy in an extremely strong position and it is to behoped that while his predecessors made the Church great byarmed force, he can make it even greater and more praise-worthy thanks to his goodness and many, many other virtues.
* The sale of Church beneﬁces and indulgences.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   47 28/05/2015   14:1412
Different kinds of armies and a
consideration of mercenary forces
Now that I’ve given a detailed account of the characteristics
of the states I set out to talk about, and examined to some
extent the reasons for their being powerful or weak and the
ways people in the past have tried to take and to hold them,I shall offer a more general discussion of the means of attackand defence available to each kind of state. We’ve alreadysaid that a ruler’s power must be based on solid foundations;otherwise he’s bound to fall. And the main foundations of any
state, whether it be new, or old, or a new territory acquired by
an old regime, are good laws and good armed forces. Andsince you can’t have good laws if you don’t have good armedforces, while if you have good armed forces good laws inevi-tably follow, I’ll leave aside a discussion of the law and go
straight to the question of the army.
Now, the armies a ruler is depending on to defend his state
will either be his own, or mercenaries, or auxiliaries, or some
combination of these. Mercenaries and auxiliaries are uselessand dangerous. If you are counting on mercenaries to defend
your state you will never be stable or secure, because mercen-
aries are ambitious, undisciplined, disloyal and they quarrelamong themselves. Courageous with friends and cowardlywith enemies, they have no fear of God and keep no promises.With mercenaries the only way to delay disaster is to delaythe battle; in peacetime they plunder you and in wartime theylet the enemy plunder you. Why? Because the only interestdifferent kinds of armies 49
they have in you and their only reason for ﬁghting is the
meagre salary you’re paying them, and that’s not reason
enough to make them want to die for you. Sure, they’re happyto be your soldiers while you’re not at war, but when warcomes, they run for it, or just disappear.
It shouldn’t be hard to convince the reader of this, since
Italy’s present ruin has been caused precisely by a prolonged
dependence on mercenaries. It’s true that mercenary forces
did win some battles and seemed courageous when ﬁghting
other mercenaries; but as soon as a foreign army turned upwe saw what they were made of: Charles, King of France,didn’t even have to ﬁght; his men just put chalk crosses on
the buildings they planned to use as billets. When Savonarolasaid we brought this on ourselves with our own sins, he wasright; except the sins were not what he was thinking of, butthe ones I’ve been talking about. And because they were ourrulers’ sins, it was our rulers who paid the price.
I’d like to offer a better explanation of why mercenaries are
not a good idea. A mercenary commander may or may not bean excellent military leader: if he is, you can’t trust him becausehe will always aspire to power himself, either by attacking you,his paymaster, or by attacking others against your wishes; butif he isn’t a capable leader, he’ll ruin you anyway. And if some-
one objects that it hardly matters who commands the army
since commanders always behave like this, whether mercenaryor no, my response is as follows: armed forces are always at theservice of a hereditary ruler or a republic. A ruler must go inperson and act as commander himself; a republic must send
its citizens; if it sends a man who turns out to be no good it
must replace him; if he is good it must keep him in line withlaws that prevent him exceeding his brief. Experience showsthat only rulers and republics with their own armies makeserious progress, while mercenaries bring nothing but trouble.And a republic with a citizen army is less likely to fall victimto a coup than a republic paying for mercenary armies.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   48 28/05/2015   14:1412
Different kinds of armies and a
consideration of mercenary forces
Now that I’ve given a detailed account of the characteristics
of the states I set out to talk about, and examined to some
extent the reasons for their being powerful or weak and the
ways people in the past have tried to take and to hold them,I shall offer a more general discussion of the means of attackand defence available to each kind of state. We’ve alreadysaid that a ruler’s power must be based on solid foundations;otherwise he’s bound to fall. And the main foundations of any
state, whether it be new, or old, or a new territory acquired by
an old regime, are good laws and good armed forces. Andsince you can’t have good laws if you don’t have good armed
forces, while if you have good armed forces good laws inevi-tably follow, I’ll leave aside a discussion of the law and go
straight to the question of the army.
Now, the armies a ruler is depending on to defend his state
will either be his own, or mercenaries, or auxiliaries, or some
combination of these. Mercenaries and auxiliaries are uselessand dangerous. If you are counting on mercenaries to defend
your state you will never be stable or secure, because mercen-
aries are ambitious, undisciplined, disloyal and they quarrelamong themselves. Courageous with friends and cowardlywith enemies, they have no fear of God and keep no promises.With mercenaries the only way to delay disaster is to delaythe battle; in peacetime they plunder you and in wartime theylet the enemy plunder you. Why? Because the only interestdifferent kinds of armies 49
they have in you and their only reason for ﬁghting is the
meagre salary you’re paying them, and that’s not reason
enough to make them want to die for you. Sure, they’re happy
to be your soldiers while you’re not at war, but when warcomes, they run for it, or just disappear.
It shouldn’t be hard to convince the reader of this, since
Italy’s present ruin has been caused precisely by a prolonged
dependence on mercenaries. It’s true that mercenary forces
did win some battles and seemed courageous when ﬁghting
other mercenaries; but as soon as a foreign army turned upwe saw what they were made of: Charles, King of France,didn’t even have to ﬁght; his men just put chalk crosses on
the buildings they planned to use as billets. When Savonarolasaid we brought this on ourselves with our own sins, he wasright; except the sins were not what he was thinking of, butthe ones I’ve been talking about. And because they were ourrulers’ sins, it was our rulers who paid the price.
I’d like to offer a better explanation of why mercenaries are
not a good idea. A mercenary commander may or may not bean excellent military leader: if he is, you can’t trust him becausehe will always aspire to power himself, either by attacking you,his paymaster, or by attacking others against your wishes; butif he isn’t a capable leader, he’ll ruin you anyway. And if some-
one objects that it hardly matters who commands the army
since commanders always behave like this, whether mercenaryor no, my response is as follows: armed forces are always at theservice of a hereditary ruler or a republic. A ruler must go inperson and act as commander himself; a republic must send
its citizens; if it sends a man who turns out to be no good it
must replace him; if he is good it must keep him in line withlaws that prevent him exceeding his brief. Experience showsthat only rulers and republics with their own armies makeserious progress, while mercenaries bring nothing but trouble.And a republic with a citizen army is less likely to fall victimto a coup than a republic paying for mercenary armies.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   49 28/05/2015   14:1450 the prince
Rome and Sparta stood for many centuries armed and free.
The Swiss are extremely well armed and completely free. One
example of the use of mercenaries in ancient times is Carthage.After the ﬁrst war with Rome the Carthaginians were almost
overthrown by their mercenaries despite the fact that thesemen were commanded by Carthaginian citizens. After thedeath of Epaminondas the Thebans made Philip of Macedonia
commander of their army and no sooner had he won the war
than he stripped them of their freedom. On the death ofFilippo Maria Visconti, the Milanese hired Francesco Sforzatoﬁght against the Venetians. Having beaten the Venetians
at Caravaggio, Sforza joined forces with them to overthrow
his paymasters, the Milanese. When Francesco’s father was
mercenary commander for Queen Joanna of Naples, he sud-denly made off and left her undefended so that she had to putherself into the hands of the King of Aragon or risk losing herkingdom.
It’s true that in the past both Venice and Florence did
increase their territories with the use of mercenaries whosecommanders did not seize power but actually defended theiremployers. The fact is that the Florentines were lucky; variouspowerful captains were indeed potential threats, but onedidn’t win his war, while others either found themselves facing
strong opposition or turned their ambitions elsewhere. The
one who didn’t win was Giovanni Acuto [John Hawkwood],and since he lost we don’t know whether he would have beenloyal or not; but everyone must admit that, had he won, theFlorentines would have been at his mercy. Francesco Sforza
had the forces of Braccio da Montone against him and the
two commanders kept each other in check: Sforza turned hisambitions to Lombardy while Braccio went to ﬁght Rome
and Naples.
But let’s remember what happened just a short while ago.
Florence took on Paulo Vitelli as military commander, anextremely serious man who had come from nothing to achievedifferent kinds of armies 51
enormous prestige. Had he taken Pisa for them, you couldhardly deny that the Florentines would have been right tohang on to him, because if he had gone over to the enemy,they wouldn’t have had a chance; but keeping him wouldhave meant accepting him as their ruler.
Turning to the Venetians, we ﬁnd they fought conﬁdently
and successfully when they fought for themselves, at sea that
is, where both nobles and armed commoners showed great
courage. But when they began to ﬁght on land, they left
these strengths behind and, like other Italian states, hiredmercenaries. In the early stages of their expansion on themainland they had so little territory and so much prestige
they hardly needed to worry about their mercenary com-
manders; but when they pushed deeper into the peninsula,under the leadership of Carmagnola, they got a taste of thetrouble mercenaries bring. They’d seen what a ﬁne com-
mander Carmagnola was and under his leadership they had
defeated the Duke of Milan, so they soon noticed when he
lost his enthusiasm for the war. They realized they couldn’twin anything else with him, because that wasn’t what hewanted, but they couldn’t ﬁre him either for fear of losing
what they had previously won; at which point the only safething to do was to kill him. Later they hired Bartolomeo da
Bergamo, Ruberto da San Severino, Niccolo `Orsini, Count of
Pitigliano, and other such mercenary commanders who were
always more likely to lose than win, and in fact at the battleof Vaila `the Venetians eventually lost in a single day all the
gains they had so determinedly accumulated over the past
800years. The fact is thatmercenaries bring only slow, belated,
unconvincing victories, then sudden, bewildering defeats.
Since these examples all have to do with Italy, which has beendominated by mercenaries for many years, I’d now like to geta broader view of the problem, because if we can trace itsorigin and developments it will be easier to ﬁnd a solution.
What we must remember is that over recent centuries, as
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   50 28/05/2015   14:1450 the prince
Rome and Sparta stood for many centuries armed and free.
The Swiss are extremely well armed and completely free. One
example of the use of mercenaries in ancient times is Carthage.After the ﬁrst war with Rome the Carthaginians were almost
overthrown by their mercenaries despite the fact that thesemen were commanded by Carthaginian citizens. After thedeath of Epaminondas the Thebans made Philip of Macedonia
commander of their army and no sooner had he won the war
than he stripped them of their freedom. On the death ofFilippo Maria Visconti, the Milanese hired Francesco Sforzatoﬁght against the Venetians. Having beaten the Venetians
at Caravaggio, Sforza joined forces with them to overthrow
his paymasters, the Milanese. When Francesco’s father was
mercenary commander for Queen Joanna of Naples, he sud-denly made off and left her undefended so that she had to putherself into the hands of the King of Aragon or risk losing herkingdom.
It’s true that in the past both Venice and Florence did
increase their territories with the use of mercenaries whosecommanders did not seize power but actually defended theiremployers. The fact is that the Florentines were lucky; variouspowerful captains were indeed potential threats, but onedidn’t win his war, while others either found themselves facing
strong opposition or turned their ambitions elsewhere. The
one who didn’t win was Giovanni Acuto [John Hawkwood],and since he lost we don’t know whether he would have beenloyal or not; but everyone must admit that, had he won, theFlorentines would have been at his mercy. Francesco Sforza
had the forces of Braccio da Montone against him and the
two commanders kept each other in check: Sforza turned hisambitions to Lombardy while Braccio went to ﬁght Rome
and Naples.
But let’s remember what happened just a short while ago.
Florence took on Paulo Vitelli as military commander, anextremely serious man who had come from nothing to achievedifferent kinds of armies 51
enormous prestige. Had he taken Pisa for them, you could
hardly deny that the Florentines would have been right tohang on to him, because if he had gone over to the enemy,they wouldn’t have had a chance; but keeping him wouldhave meant accepting him as their ruler.
Turning to the Venetians, we ﬁnd they fought conﬁdently
and successfully when they fought for themselves, at sea that
is, where both nobles and armed commoners showed great
courage. But when they began to ﬁght on land, they left
these strengths behind and, like other Italian states, hiredmercenaries. In the early stages of their expansion on themainland they had so little territory and so much prestige
they hardly needed to worry about their mercenary com-
manders; but when they pushed deeper into the peninsula,under the leadership of Carmagnola, they got a taste of thetrouble mercenaries bring. They’d seen what a ﬁne com-
mander Carmagnola was and under his leadership they had
defeated the Duke of Milan, so they soon noticed when he
lost his enthusiasm for the war. They realized they couldn’twin anything else with him, because that wasn’t what hewanted, but they couldn’t ﬁre him either for fear of losing
what they had previously won; at which point the only safething to do was to kill him. Later they hired Bartolomeo da
Bergamo, Ruberto da San Severino, Niccolo `Orsini, Count of
Pitigliano, and other such mercenary commanders who were
always more likely to lose than win, and in fact at the battleof Vaila `the Venetians eventually lost in a single day all the
gains they had so determinedly accumulated over the past
800years. The fact is thatmercenaries bring only slow, belated,
unconvincing victories, then sudden, bewildering defeats.
Since these examples all have to do with Italy, which has beendominated by mercenaries for many years, I’d now like to geta broader view of the problem, because if we can trace itsorigin and developments it will be easier to ﬁnd a solution.
What we must remember is that over recent centuries, as
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   51 28/05/2015   14:1452 the prince
the empire began to lose its hold in Italy while the pope
increased his temporal power, so the country broke up intosmaller states. Many of the larger cities rose up against thelocal nobles who had needed the emperor’s backing to keepcontrol of them; the Church supported the rebels to increaseits own political inﬂuence. In many other towns privatecitizens took over as rulers. The result was that with much of
Italy now controlled by the Church and republics, which is
to say by people who had no experience of war, leadersbegan to hire men from outside. The ﬁrst successful mercenary
commander was Alberigo da Conio from Romagna. Withwhat they learned from him, Braccio da Montone and
Francesco Sforza and others would become arbiters of Italy’s
destiny. After them came all the other mercenary commanders
down to our own times. And the end result of all their geniusis that Italy was overrun by Charles, ransacked by Louis, tornapart by Ferdinand and humiliated by the Swiss.
The mercenaries’ﬁ rst tactic was to increase their own
importance by playing down the importance of infantry. Hav-ing no territory of their own and living on what they got fromﬁghting, they couldn’t feed large numbers of infantry, while
smaller numbers weren’t sufﬁciently impressive; so they con-centrated on cavalry and were fed and respected with more
manageable numbers. Things reached the point where an
army of 20,000 would have fewer than 2,000 infantry. Aside
from this the mercenaries did everything possible to avoidhard work and danger; they wouldn’t kill each other incombat but took prisoners, then didn’t even ask for a ran-
som. They wouldn’t attack fortiﬁcations at night; and they
wouldn’t leave their own fortiﬁcations to attack a besieging
army’s camp. They didn’t dig ditches or build stockades round
their camps; in winter they didn’t camp out at all. All these
omissions became accepted practice for the simple reason, asI said, that they wanted to steer clear of danger and hardwork. Thus they brought Italy to slavery and humiliation.13
Auxiliaries, combined forces and
citizen armies
Auxiliary armies –that is, when you ask a powerful ruler to
send military help to defend your town –are likewise useless.
In recent times we have the example of Pope Julius during hisFerrara campaign: having seen what a sad lot his mercenarieswere in battle, he reached an agreement with Ferdinand, Kingof Spain, to have his forces come to help. Auxiliaries may beefﬁcient and useful when it comes to achieving their ownends, but they are almost always counterproductive for those
who invite them in, because if they lose, you lose too, and if
they win, you are at their mercy.
Although ancient history is full of pertinent examples, I’d
like to stick to this recent case of Pope Julius II, whose decisionto put himself entirely in a foreign army’s hands merely to
take Ferrara could hardly have been more rash. But he was
lucky and the unlikely outcome of the campaign spared himthe possible consequences of his mistake: when his Spanishauxiliaries were beaten at Ravenna, the Swiss turned up andagainst all expectations –the pope’s included –routed the
hitherto victorious French, so that Julius escaped being aprisoner either to his enemies, who had ﬂed, or to his auxil-
iaries, who weren’t the ones to win the day for him. TheFlorentines, who had no armed forces at all, took 10,000
French auxiliaries to lay siege to Pisa, a decision that put themin greater danger than any they had experienced in their wholetroubled history. To ﬁght his neighbours, the emperor of
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   52 28/05/2015   14:1452 the prince
the empire began to lose its hold in Italy while the pope
increased his temporal power, so the country broke up intosmaller states. Many of the larger cities rose up against thelocal nobles who had needed the emperor’s backing to keepcontrol of them; the Church supported the rebels to increaseits own political inﬂuence. In many other towns private
citizens took over as rulers. The result was that with much of
Italy now controlled by the Church and republics, which is
to say by people who had no experience of war, leadersbegan to hire men from outside. The ﬁrst successful mercenary
commander was Alberigo da Conio from Romagna. Withwhat they learned from him, Braccio da Montone and
Francesco Sforza and others would become arbiters of Italy’s
destiny. After them came all the other mercenary commandersdown to our own times. And the end result of all their geniusis that Italy was overrun by Charles, ransacked by Louis, tornapart by Ferdinand and humiliated by the Swiss.
The mercenaries’ﬁ rst tactic was to increase their own
importance by playing down the importance of infantry. Hav-ing no territory of their own and living on what they got fromﬁghting, they couldn’t feed large numbers of infantry, whilesmaller numbers weren’t sufﬁciently impressive; so they con-centrated on cavalry and were fed and respected with more
manageable numbers. Things reached the point where an
army of 20,000 would have fewer than 2,000 infantry. Aside
from this the mercenaries did everything possible to avoidhard work and danger; they wouldn’t kill each other incombat but took prisoners, then didn’t even ask for a ran-
som. They wouldn’t attack fortiﬁcations at night; and they
wouldn’t leave their own fortiﬁcations to attack a besieging
army’s camp. They didn’t dig ditches or build stockades roundtheir camps; in winter they didn’t camp out at all. All theseomissions became accepted practice for the simple reason, asI said, that they wanted to steer clear of danger and hardwork. Thus they brought Italy to slavery and humiliation.13
Auxiliaries, combined forces and
citizen armies
Auxiliary armies –that is, when you ask a powerful ruler to
send military help to defend your town –are likewise useless.
In recent times we have the example of Pope Julius during his
Ferrara campaign: having seen what a sad lot his mercenarieswere in battle, he reached an agreement with Ferdinand, Kingof Spain, to have his forces come to help. Auxiliaries may beefﬁcient and useful when it comes to achieving their ownends, but they are almost always counterproductive for those
who invite them in, because if they lose, you lose too, and if
they win, you are at their mercy.
Although ancient history is full of pertinent examples, I’d
like to stick to this recent case of Pope Julius II, whose decisionto put himself entirely in a foreign army’s hands merely to
take Ferrara could hardly have been more rash. But he was
lucky and the unlikely outcome of the campaign spared himthe possible consequences of his mistake: when his Spanishauxiliaries were beaten at Ravenna, the Swiss turned up andagainst all expectations –the pope’s included –routed the
hitherto victorious French, so that Julius escaped being aprisoner either to his enemies, who had ﬂed, or to his auxil-
iaries, who weren’t the ones to win the day for him. TheFlorentines, who had no armed forces at all, took 10,000
French auxiliaries to lay siege to Pisa, a decision that put themin greater danger than any they had experienced in their wholetroubled history. To ﬁght his neighbours, the emperor of
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   53 28/05/2015   14:1454 the prince
Constantinople brought 10,000 Turks into Greece and when
the war was over they wouldn’t leave, which was how the
inﬁdels began to get control of Greece.
So anyone looking for a no-win situation should turn to
auxiliaries, because they are far more dangerous even thanmercenaries. With auxiliaries your ruin is guaranteed: theyare a tightly knit force and every one of them obedient to
someone else; when mercenaries win they need time and a
convenient opportunity before they can attack you, if onlybecause they’re not a solid united force, you chose them,you’re paying them, and hence it will take the man you putin command a while to build up sufﬁcient authority to turn
against you. To summarize, the big danger with mercenaries
is their indecision, with auxiliaries their determination.
So, sensible rulers have always avoided using auxiliaries
and mercenaries, relying instead on their own men and evenpreferring to lose with their own troops than to win with
others, on the principle that a victory won with foreign forces
is not a real victory at all. As always Cesare Borgia offers agood example. He invaded Romagna with an army entirelymade up of French auxiliaries and took Imola and Forlı `with
them; but since he felt they weren’t reliable he turned tomercenaries as a less dangerous option. He hired the Orsini
and Vitelli armies, but when he found that they dithered in
battle and were disloyal and dangerous, he had them killedand trained his own men. It’s easy to see the differencebetween these various kinds of armies if you look at the duke’sstanding when he had just the French, when he had the Orsinis
and the Vitellis, and when he had his own soldiers and relied
on his own resources. With each change his prestige grew andhe was only truly respected when everyone could see that histroops were entirely his own.
I had planned to stick to these recent Italian examples, but
I wouldn’t like to leave out Hiero of Syracuse since he isone of the men I talked about before. Given command, as Iauxiliaries, combined forces and citizen armies 55
explained, of the Syracusan armies, Hiero soon realized thatthe mercenaries among them were no good, led as they wereby men like our Italian commanders. Realizing that he couldneither make use of them nor let them go, he had them all cutto pieces, and from then on fought only with his own soldiers.I’d also like to bring in a parable from the Old Testament.When David offered to go and ﬁght the Philistine trouble-
maker, Goliath, on Saul’s behalf, Saul gave him his ownweapons to bolster the boy’s courage. But no sooner hadDavid put them on than he refused the gift, saying he wouldn’t
feel conﬁdent with them, he would rather face the enemy withhis own sling and knife. In the end, other people’s arms are
either too loose, too heavy or too tight.
When, with luck and good leadership, Charles VII,
Louis XI’s father, had pushed the English out of France, he
saw that a ruler needs his own troops and so set up a standingarmy of both cavalry and infantry. Later, his son Louis dis-
banded the infantry and began to hire Swiss mercenaries.
It’s now plain that this mistake, together with others thatfollowed, is what lies behind France’s present troubles. Bygiving this important role to the Swiss, Louis had weakenedhis whole army, since, with no infantry of their own, hiscavalry were now relying on others, and once they’d got
used to ﬁghting alongside the Swiss they started to think
they couldn’t win without them. As a result the French are
unable to take on the Swiss in battle and won’t ﬁght anyone
else without their help. So French forces are now mixed,
part mercenary and part their own men. Such composite
forces are much better than just auxiliaries or just mercen-
aries, but much worse than having all your own men. France’s
situation proves the point, because if the standing armyCharles recruited had been reinforced or just maintained, theFrench would be unbeatable. But men are so thoughtlessthey’ll opt for a diet that tastes good without realizing there’sa hidden poison in it: it’s like the problem I mentioned earlier
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   54 28/05/2015   14:1454 the prince
Constantinople brought 10,000 Turks into Greece and when
the war was over they wouldn’t leave, which was how the
inﬁdels began to get control of Greece.
So anyone looking for a no-win situation should turn to
auxiliaries, because they are far more dangerous even thanmercenaries. With auxiliaries your ruin is guaranteed: theyare a tightly knit force and every one of them obedient to
someone else; when mercenaries win they need time and a
convenient opportunity before they can attack you, if onlybecause they’re not a solid united force, you chose them,you’re paying them, and hence it will take the man you putin command a while to build up sufﬁcient authority to turn
against you. To summarize, the big danger with mercenaries
is their indecision, with auxiliaries their determination.
So, sensible rulers have always avoided using auxiliaries
and mercenaries, relying instead on their own men and evenpreferring to lose with their own troops than to win with
others, on the principle that a victory won with foreign forces
is not a real victory at all. As always Cesare Borgia offers agood example. He invaded Romagna with an army entirelymade up of French auxiliaries and took Imola and Forlı `with
them; but since he felt they weren’t reliable he turned tomercenaries as a less dangerous option. He hired the Orsini
and Vitelli armies, but when he found that they dithered in
battle and were disloyal and dangerous, he had them killedand trained his own men. It’s easy to see the differencebetween these various kinds of armies if you look at the duke’s
standing when he had just the French, when he had the Orsinis
and the Vitellis, and when he had his own soldiers and relied
on his own resources. With each change his prestige grew andhe was only truly respected when everyone could see that histroops were entirely his own.
I had planned to stick to these recent Italian examples, but
I wouldn’t like to leave out Hiero of Syracuse since he isone of the men I talked about before. Given command, as Iauxiliaries, combined forces and citizen armies 55
explained, of the Syracusan armies, Hiero soon realized that
the mercenaries among them were no good, led as they wereby men like our Italian commanders. Realizing that he couldneither make use of them nor let them go, he had them all cutto pieces, and from then on fought only with his own soldiers.I’d also like to bring in a parable from the Old Testament.When David offered to go and ﬁght the Philistine trouble-
maker, Goliath, on Saul’s behalf, Saul gave him his ownweapons to bolster the boy’s courage. But no sooner hadDavid put them on than he refused the gift, saying he wouldn’tfeel conﬁdent with them, he would rather face the enemy withhis own sling and knife. In the end, other people’s arms are
either too loose, too heavy or too tight.
When, with luck and good leadership, Charles VII,
Louis XI’s father, had pushed the English out of France, hesaw that a ruler needs his own troops and so set up a standingarmy of both cavalry and infantry. Later, his son Louis dis-
banded the infantry and began to hire Swiss mercenaries.
It’s now plain that this mistake, together with others thatfollowed, is what lies behind France’s present troubles. Bygiving this important role to the Swiss, Louis had weakenedhis whole army, since, with no infantry of their own, hiscavalry were now relying on others, and once they’d got
used to ﬁghting alongside the Swiss they started to think
they couldn’t win without them. As a result the French are
unable to take on the Swiss in battle and won’t ﬁght anyone
else without their help. So French forces are now mixed,
part mercenary and part their own men. Such composite
forces are much better than just auxiliaries or just mercen-
aries, but much worse than having all your own men. France’s
situation proves the point, because if the standing armyCharles recruited had been reinforced or just maintained, theFrench would be unbeatable. But men are so thoughtlessthey’ll opt for a diet that tastes good without realizing there’sa hidden poison in it: it’s like the problem I mentioned earlier
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   55 28/05/2015   14:1456 the prince
about people not diagnosing tuberculosis until it’s too late.
So, if a man can’t spot a problem in the making, he can’t
really be a wise leader. But very few men have this gift. If you
look for the initial cause of the collapse of the Roman empire,you’ll ﬁnd it was when they started hiring Goths as mercen-
aries. From that moment on the strength of the empire beganto decline and all the determination that drained out of it
went to strengthen its rivals.
So, to conclude: no state is secure without its own army; if
it hasn’t got men to defend it determinedly and loyally in a
crisis, it is simply relying on luck. As those who understandthese things have always thought and said: There is nothing
so weak and unstable as a reputation for power that is notbacked up by its own army.* And having your own armymeans having a force made up of subjects, or citizens, ormen dependent on you. All other forces are mercenaries orauxiliaries. To see how to set up your own armed forces, all
you need do is consider how the four men I mentioned above
organized and arranged theirs, or Philip, Alexander theGreat’s father, or many other kingdoms and republics. Theyare all entirely reliable models.
* Quod nihil sit tam inﬁrmum aut instabile quam fama potentiae non sua
vi nixa.14
A ruler and his army
A ruler, then, must have no other aim or consideration, nor
seek to develop any other vocation outside war, the organiz-
ation of the army and military discipline. This is the only
proper vocation of the man in command. And it’s such apotent one that it not only keeps those born to rule on theirthrones but often raises private citizens to political power.Vice versa, when rulers think more about frills than ﬁght-
ing they lose their thrones. In fact, the thing most likely to
bring about a ruler’s downfall is his neglect of the art of
war; the thing most likely to win him power is becoming anexpert in it.
A military man with his own army, Francesco Sforza rose
from commoner to Duke of Milan; shunning military hard-
ships, his sons fell from dukes to commoners. For one of the
many negative consequences of not having an army is thatpeople will ﬁnd you pathetic, and this is a stigma a ruler must
guard against, as I’ll explain. The fact is that between a manwho has an army and a man who hasn’t there is simply no
comparison. And there is no reason why a man who com-
mands an armed force should willingly obey a man whodoesn’t, or why a man who doesn’t command an army should
live safely beside a servant who does. The one will harbourcontempt and the other suspicion and they won’t be able towork well together. So, quite apart from the other disadvan-tages, a ruler who doesn’t involve himself in military matters
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   56 28/05/2015   14:1456 the prince
about people not diagnosing tuberculosis until it’s too late.
So, if a man can’t spot a problem in the making, he can’t
really be a wise leader. But very few men have this gift. If you
look for the initial cause of the collapse of the Roman empire,you’ll ﬁnd it was when they started hiring Goths as mercen-
aries. From that moment on the strength of the empire beganto decline and all the determination that drained out of it
went to strengthen its rivals.
So, to conclude: no state is secure without its own army; if
it hasn’t got men to defend it determinedly and loyally in a
crisis, it is simply relying on luck. As those who understandthese things have always thought and said: There is nothing
so weak and unstable as a reputation for power that is notbacked up by its own army.* And having your own armymeans having a force made up of subjects, or citizens, ormen dependent on you. All other forces are mercenaries orauxiliaries. To see how to set up your own armed forces, all
you need do is consider how the four men I mentioned above
organized and arranged theirs, or Philip, Alexander theGreat’s father, or many other kingdoms and republics. Theyare all entirely reliable models.
* Quod nihil sit tam inﬁrmum aut instabile quam fama potentiae non sua
vi nixa.14
A ruler and his army
A ruler, then, must have no other aim or consideration, nor
seek to develop any other vocation outside war, the organiz-
ation of the army and military discipline. This is the only
proper vocation of the man in command. And it’s such apotent one that it not only keeps those born to rule on theirthrones but often raises private citizens to political power.Vice versa, when rulers think more about frills than ﬁght-
ing they lose their thrones. In fact, the thing most likely to
bring about a ruler’s downfall is his neglect of the art of
war; the thing most likely to win him power is becoming anexpert in it.
A military man with his own army, Francesco Sforza rose
from commoner to Duke of Milan; shunning military hard-
ships, his sons fell from dukes to commoners. For one of the
many negative consequences of not having an army is thatpeople will ﬁnd you pathetic, and this is a stigma a ruler must
guard against, as I’ll explain. The fact is that between a manwho has an army and a man who hasn’t there is simply no
comparison. And there is no reason why a man who com-
mands an armed force should willingly obey a man whodoesn’t, or why a man who doesn’t command an army shouldlive safely beside a servant who does. The one will harbourcontempt and the other suspicion and they won’t be able to
work well together. So, quite apart from the other disadvan-tages, a ruler who doesn’t involve himself in military matters
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   57 28/05/2015   14:1458 the prince
won’t, as I’ve said, have his soldiers’ respect and won’t be
able to trust them.
A ruler, then, must never stop thinking about war and
preparing for war and he must work at it even more in peace-
time than in war itself. He can do this in two ways, physicallyand mentally. Physically, aside from keeping his men exer-cised and disciplined, he should go hunting a great deal, which
will toughen up his body. It will also help him get to know
different landscapes, how the mountains rise and the valleysopen out, the lie of the plains, what rivers and marshes arelike. These are things he should study really carefully sincethis kind of knowledge is useful in two ways. First, he’ll get
to know his own country and hence will have a better sense
of how it can be defended. Second, familiarity with theseplaces will make it easier for him to grasp the topography ofplaces he needs to understand but hasn’t seen before. The
hills, valleys, plains, rivers and marshes of Tuscany, for
example, have much in common with those of other areas, so
that knowing the lie of the land in one region makes it easierto get to know it in another. The ruler who doesn’t havethis facility lacks the ﬁrst thing a commander needs, because
understanding the land helps you ﬁnd the enemy, lead your
army by the right route, choose a place to camp, plan out the
battle and lay siege to a town, all in the best way possible.
One of the things historians admired about the Achaean
leader Philopoemen was that even in peacetime he thought of
nothing but military strategy and when he was in the countrywith his friends he would often stop and ask them: If the
enemy were over there on that hill and we were down here
with our army, who would be in the better position? Howcould we attack them without breaking ranks? If we decidedto retreat, how would we do it? And if they retreated, howwould we go after them? And as he and his friends went alonghe would list all the predicaments an army can ﬁnd itself in.
He listened to their ideas, expressed and explained his own;a ruler and his army 59
so much so that, thanks to this constant work of mentalpreparation, when he was back leading his armies there wassimply nothing that could happen that he didn’t know howto deal with.
Another thing a ruler must do to exercise his mind is read
history, in particular accounts of great leaders and theirachievements. He should look at their wartime strategies and
study the reasons for their victories and defeats so as to avoid
the failures and imitate the successes. Above all he must dowhat some great men have done in the past: take as model aleader who’s been much praised and admired and keep hisexample and achievements in mind at all times. Alexander
the Great, it seems, modelled himself on Achilles, Caesar on
Alexander and Scipio on Cyrus. Anyone who reads Xeno-phon’s life of Cyrus will see how valuable his example was toScipio, and how closely Scipio’s decency, charm, humanity
and generosity conform to the description Xenophon gives of
Cyrus. A sensible leader must follow this advice and never
relax in peacetime but work hard to make the most of it andturn it to his advantage in the tough times ahead. That way,when his luck does turn, he’ll be ready.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   58 28/05/2015   14:1458 the prince
won’t, as I’ve said, have his soldiers’ respect and won’t be
able to trust them.
A ruler, then, must never stop thinking about war and
preparing for war and he must work at it even more in peace-
time than in war itself. He can do this in two ways, physicallyand mentally. Physically, aside from keeping his men exer-cised and disciplined, he should go hunting a great deal, which
will toughen up his body. It will also help him get to know
different landscapes, how the mountains rise and the valleysopen out, the lie of the plains, what rivers and marshes arelike. These are things he should study really carefully sincethis kind of knowledge is useful in two ways. First, he’ll get
to know his own country and hence will have a better senseof how it can be defended. Second, familiarity with theseplaces will make it easier for him to grasp the topography ofplaces he needs to understand but hasn’t seen before. Thehills, valleys, plains, rivers and marshes of Tuscany, for
example, have much in common with those of other areas, so
that knowing the lie of the land in one region makes it easierto get to know it in another. The ruler who doesn’t havethis facility lacks the ﬁrst thing a commander needs, because
understanding the land helps you ﬁnd the enemy, lead your
army by the right route, choose a place to camp, plan out the
battle and lay siege to a town, all in the best way possible.
One of the things historians admired about the Achaean
leader Philopoemen was that even in peacetime he thought of
nothing but military strategy and when he was in the countrywith his friends he would often stop and ask them: If the
enemy were over there on that hill and we were down here
with our army, who would be in the better position? Howcould we attack them without breaking ranks? If we decidedto retreat, how would we do it? And if they retreated, howwould we go after them? And as he and his friends went alonghe would list all the predicaments an army can ﬁnd itself in.
He listened to their ideas, expressed and explained his own;a ruler and his army 59
so much so that, thanks to this constant work of mental
preparation, when he was back leading his armies there wassimply nothing that could happen that he didn’t know howto deal with.
Another thing a ruler must do to exercise his mind is read
history, in particular accounts of great leaders and theirachievements. He should look at their wartime strategies and
study the reasons for their victories and defeats so as to avoid
the failures and imitate the successes. Above all he must dowhat some great men have done in the past: take as model aleader who’s been much praised and admired and keep hisexample and achievements in mind at all times. Alexander
the Great, it seems, modelled himself on Achilles, Caesar on
Alexander and Scipio on Cyrus. Anyone who reads Xeno-phon’s life of Cyrus will see how valuable his example was toScipio, and how closely Scipio’s decency, charm, humanityand generosity conform to the description Xenophon gives of
Cyrus. A sensible leader must follow this advice and never
relax in peacetime but work hard to make the most of it andturn it to his advantage in the tough times ahead. That way,when his luck does turn, he’ll be ready.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   59 28/05/2015   14:1415
What men and particularly rulers are
praised and blamed for
It’s time to look at how a ruler should behave with his subjects
and his friends. Given that a great deal has already been
written about this, I fear people may ﬁnd my contribution
presumptuous, especially since, here more than elsewhere, the
code of conduct I’m offering will be rather controversial.But since my aim was to write something useful for anyoneinterested, I felt it would be appropriate to go to the real truthof the matter, not to repeat other people’s fantasies. Many
writers have dreamed up republics and kingdoms that bear
no resemblance to experience and never existed in reality;there is such a gap between how people actually live and howthey ought to live that anyone who declines to behave aspeople do, in order to behave as they should, is schooling
himself for catastrophe and had better forget personal secur-
ity: if you always want to play the good man in a world wheremost people are not good, you’ll end up badly. Hence, if aruler wants to survive, he’ll have to learn to stop being good,at least when the occasion demands.
So leaving aside things people have dreamed up about rulers
and concentrating instead on reality, let’s say that when wetalk about anyone, but especially about leaders, who are moreexposed than others to the public eye, what we point are thequalities that prompt praise or blame. One man is thoughtgenerous and another miserly; one is seen as benevolent,another as grasping; one cruel, the other kind; one treacherous,what rulers are praised and blamed for 61
another loyal; one effeminate and fearful, another bold andbrave; one considerate, another arrogant; one promiscuous,another chaste; one straightforward, another devious; onestubborn, another accommodating; one solemn, anothersuperﬁcial; one religious, another unbelieving, and so on.
And I’m sure we’d all agree that it would be an excellent
thing if a ruler were to have all the good qualities mentioned
above and none of the bad; but since it’s in the nature of life
that you can’t have or practise all those qualities all of thetime, a ruler must take care to avoid the disgrace that goeswith the kind of failings that could lose him his position. Asfor failings that wouldn’t lead to his losing power, he should
avoid them if he can; but if he can’t, he needn’t worry too
much. In the same way, he mustn’t be concerned about thebad reputation that comes with those negative qualities thatare almost essential if he is to hold on to power. If you thinkabout it, there’ll always be something that looks morally right
but would actually lead a ruler to disaster, and something else
that looks wrong but will bring security and success.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   60 28/05/2015   14:1415
What men and particularly rulers are
praised and blamed for
It’s time to look at how a ruler should behave with his subjects
and his friends. Given that a great deal has already been
written about this, I fear people may ﬁnd my contribution
presumptuous, especially since, here more than elsewhere, the
code of conduct I’m offering will be rather controversial.But since my aim was to write something useful for anyoneinterested, I felt it would be appropriate to go to the real truthof the matter, not to repeat other people’s fantasies. Many
writers have dreamed up republics and kingdoms that bear
no resemblance to experience and never existed in reality;there is such a gap between how people actually live and howthey ought to live that anyone who declines to behave aspeople do, in order to behave as they should, is schooling
himself for catastrophe and had better forget personal secur-
ity: if you always want to play the good man in a world wheremost people are not good, you’ll end up badly. Hence, if aruler wants to survive, he’ll have to learn to stop being good,
at least when the occasion demands.
So leaving aside things people have dreamed up about rulers
and concentrating instead on reality, let’s say that when wetalk about anyone, but especially about leaders, who are moreexposed than others to the public eye, what we point are thequalities that prompt praise or blame. One man is thoughtgenerous and another miserly; one is seen as benevolent,another as grasping; one cruel, the other kind; one treacherous,what rulers are praised and blamed for 61
another loyal; one effeminate and fearful, another bold and
brave; one considerate, another arrogant; one promiscuous,another chaste; one straightforward, another devious; onestubborn, another accommodating; one solemn, anothersuperﬁcial; one religious, another unbelieving, and so on.
And I’m sure we’d all agree that it would be an excellent
thing if a ruler were to have all the good qualities mentioned
above and none of the bad; but since it’s in the nature of life
that you can’t have or practise all those qualities all of thetime, a ruler must take care to avoid the disgrace that goeswith the kind of failings that could lose him his position. Asfor failings that wouldn’t lead to his losing power, he should
avoid them if he can; but if he can’t, he needn’t worry too
much. In the same way, he mustn’t be concerned about thebad reputation that comes with those negative qualities thatare almost essential if he is to hold on to power. If you thinkabout it, there’ll always be something that looks morally right
but would actually lead a ruler to disaster, and something else
that looks wrong but will bring security and success.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   61 28/05/2015   14:1416
Generosity and meanness
If we take the ﬁrst of the qualities listed above, we can say
that it would be nice to be seen as generous. All the same,
being generous just to be seen to be so will damage you.
Generosity practised out of real good will, as it should be,risks passing unnoticed and you won’t escape a reputationfor meanness. Hence, if you’re determined to have peoplethink of you as generous, you’ll have to be lavish in every
possible way; naturally, a ruler who follows this policy will
soon use up all his wealth to the point that, if he wants to
keep up his reputation, he’ll have to impose special taxes anddo everything a ruler can to raise cash. His people will startto hate him and no one will respect him now he has no money.Since his generosity will have damaged the majority and bene-
ﬁted only a few, he’ll be vulnerable to the ﬁrst bad news, and
the ﬁrst real danger may well topple him. When he realizes
this and tries to change his ways, he’ll immediately be accused
of meanness.
Since a ruler can’t be generous and show it without putting
himself at risk, if he’s sensible he won’t mind getting a repu-tation for meanness. With time, when people see that hispenny-pinching means he doesn’t need to raise taxes and candefend the country against attack and embark on campaignswithout putting a burden on his people, he’ll increasingly beseen as generous –generous to those he takes nothing from,
which is to say almost everybody, and mean to those who getgenerosity and meanness 63
nothing from him, which is to say very few. In our owntimes the only leaders we’ve seen doing great things wereall reckoned mean. The others were failures. Pope Julius IIexploited his reputation for generosity to get the papacy, thengladly let it go to ﬁnance his wars. The present King of France
has fought many wars without resorting to new taxes, some-thing he can do because his constant cost-cutting has provided
for the extra expenditure. The present King of Spain would
not have won all the wars he has if he had had a reputationfor generosity.
So, if as a result he has the resources to defend his country,
isn’t obliged to steal from his subjects or prey on others, and
is in no danger of falling into poverty, a ruler need hardly
worry about a reputation for meanness; it is one of the nega-tive qualities that keep him in power. And if someone protests:But it was generosity that won Caesar the empire and manyothers have risen to the highest positions because they were
and were seen to be generous, my response is: A ruler in
power and a man seeking power are two different things. Forthe ruler already in power generosity is dangerous; for theman seeking power it is essential. Caesar was one of a numberof men who wanted to become emperor of Rome; but if he’d
survived as emperor and gone on spending in the same way,
he would have destroyed the empire. And if someone were to
object: Many rulers who scored great military victories wereconsidered extremely generous, I’d reply: Either a ruler isspending his own and his subjects’ money, or someone else’s.
When the money is his own or his subjects’, he should go easy;
when it’s someone else’s, he should be as lavish as he can.
A ruler leading his armies and living on plunder, pillage
and extortion is using other people’s money and had better
be generous with it, otherwise his soldiers won’t follow him.What’s not your own or your subjects’ can be given away
freely: Cyrus did this; so did Caesar and Alexander. Spendingother people’s money doesn’t lower your standing –it raises
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   62 28/05/2015   14:1416
Generosity and meanness
If we take the ﬁrst of the qualities listed above, we can say
that it would be nice to be seen as generous. All the same,
being generous just to be seen to be so will damage you.
Generosity practised out of real good will, as it should be,risks passing unnoticed and you won’t escape a reputationfor meanness. Hence, if you’re determined to have people
think of you as generous, you’ll have to be lavish in everypossible way; naturally, a ruler who follows this policy will
soon use up all his wealth to the point that, if he wants to
keep up his reputation, he’ll have to impose special taxes anddo everything a ruler can to raise cash. His people will startto hate him and no one will respect him now he has no money.Since his generosity will have damaged the majority and bene-
ﬁted only a few, he’ll be vulnerable to the ﬁrst bad news, and
the ﬁrst real danger may well topple him. When he realizes
this and tries to change his ways, he’ll immediately be accused
of meanness.
Since a ruler can’t be generous and show it without putting
himself at risk, if he’s sensible he won’t mind getting a repu-tation for meanness. With time, when people see that hispenny-pinching means he doesn’t need to raise taxes and candefend the country against attack and embark on campaignswithout putting a burden on his people, he’ll increasingly beseen as generous –generous to those he takes nothing from,
which is to say almost everybody, and mean to those who getgenerosity and meanness 63
nothing from him, which is to say very few. In our own
times the only leaders we’ve seen doing great things wereall reckoned mean. The others were failures. Pope Julius IIexploited his reputation for generosity to get the papacy, thengladly let it go to ﬁnance his wars. The present King of France
has fought many wars without resorting to new taxes, some-thing he can do because his constant cost-cutting has provided
for the extra expenditure. The present King of Spain would
not have won all the wars he has if he had had a reputationfor generosity.
So, if as a result he has the resources to defend his country,
isn’t obliged to steal from his subjects or prey on others, and
is in no danger of falling into poverty, a ruler need hardly
worry about a reputation for meanness; it is one of the nega-tive qualities that keep him in power. And if someone protests:But it was generosity that won Caesar the empire and manyothers have risen to the highest positions because they were
and were seen to be generous, my response is: A ruler in
power and a man seeking power are two different things. Forthe ruler already in power generosity is dangerous; for theman seeking power it is essential. Caesar was one of a numberof men who wanted to become emperor of Rome; but if he’dsurvived as emperor and gone on spending in the same way,
he would have destroyed the empire. And if someone were to
object: Many rulers who scored great military victories wereconsidered extremely generous, I’d reply: Either a ruler is
spending his own and his subjects’ money, or someone else’s.
When the money is his own or his subjects’, he should go easy;
when it’s someone else’s, he should be as lavish as he can.
A ruler leading his armies and living on plunder, pillage
and extortion is using other people’s money and had better
be generous with it, otherwise his soldiers won’t follow him.What’s not your own or your subjects’ can be given away
freely: Cyrus did this; so did Caesar and Alexander. Spendingother people’s money doesn’t lower your standing –it raises
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   63 28/05/2015   14:1464 the prince
it. It’s only spending your own money that puts you at risk.
Nothing consumes itself so much as generosity, because whileyou practise it you’re losing the wherewithal to go on practis-ing it. Either you fall into poverty and are despised for it, or,to avoid poverty, you become grasping and hateful. Aboveall else a king must guard against being despised and hated.Generosity leads to both. It’s far more sensible to keep a
reputation for meanness, which carries a stigma but doesn’t
rouse people’s hatred, than to strive to be seen as generous andﬁnd at the end of the day that you’re thought of as grasping,
something that carries a stigma and gets you hated too.17
Cruelty and compassion. Whether it’s
better to be feared or loved
Continuing with our list of qualities, I’m sure every leaderwould wish to be seen as compassionate rather than cruel.
All the same he must be careful not to use his compassion
unwisely. Cesare Borgia was thought to be cruel, yet hiscruelty restored order to Romagna and united it, making theregion peaceful and loyal. When you think about it, he wasmuch more compassionate than the Florentines whose reluc-tance to be thought cruel led to disaster in Pistoia. A ruler
mustn’t worry about being labelled cruel when it’s a question
of keeping his subjects loyal and united; using a little exem-
plary severity, he will prove more compassionate than theleader whose excessive compassion leads to public disorder,muggings and murder. That kind of trouble tends to harm
everyone, while the death sentences that a ruler hands out
affect only the individuals involved. But of all rulers, a mannew to power simply cannot avoid a reputation for cruelty,since a newly conquered state is a very dangerous place. Virgilputs these words in Queen Dido’s mouth:
The difﬁcult situation and the newness of my kingdom
Force me to do these things, and guard my borders everywhere.*
*Res dura, et regni novitas me talia cogunt
Moliri, et late ﬁnes custode tueri.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   64 28/05/2015   14:1464 the prince
it. It’s only spending your own money that puts you at risk.
Nothing consumes itself so much as generosity, because whileyou practise it you’re losing the wherewithal to go on practis-ing it. Either you fall into poverty and are despised for it, or,to avoid poverty, you become grasping and hateful. Aboveall else a king must guard against being despised and hated.Generosity leads to both. It’s far more sensible to keep a
reputation for meanness, which carries a stigma but doesn’t
rouse people’s hatred, than to strive to be seen as generous and
ﬁnd at the end of the day that you’re thought of as grasping,something that carries a stigma and gets you hated too.17
Cruelty and compassion. Whether it’s
better to be feared or loved
Continuing with our list of qualities, I’m sure every leader
would wish to be seen as compassionate rather than cruel.
All the same he must be careful not to use his compassion
unwisely. Cesare Borgia was thought to be cruel, yet hiscruelty restored order to Romagna and united it, making theregion peaceful and loyal. When you think about it, he wasmuch more compassionate than the Florentines whose reluc-tance to be thought cruel led to disaster in Pistoia. A ruler
mustn’t worry about being labelled cruel when it’s a question
of keeping his subjects loyal and united; using a little exem-plary severity, he will prove more compassionate than theleader whose excessive compassion leads to public disorder,muggings and murder. That kind of trouble tends to harm
everyone, while the death sentences that a ruler hands out
affect only the individuals involved. But of all rulers, a mannew to power simply cannot avoid a reputation for cruelty,since a newly conquered state is a very dangerous place. Virgilputs these words in Queen Dido’s mouth:
The difﬁcult situation and the newness of my kingdom
Force me to do these things, and guard my borders everywhere.*
*Res dura, et regni novitas me talia cogunt
Moliri, et late ﬁnes custode tueri.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   65 28/05/2015   14:1466 the prince
All the same, a leader must think carefully before believing
and responding to certain allegations and not get frightened
over nothing. He should go about things coolly, cautiouslyand humanely: if he’s too trusting, he’ll get careless, and if hetrusts no one he’ll make himself unbearable.
These reﬂections prompt the question: is it better to be
loved rather than feared, or vice versa? The answer is that
one would prefer to be both but, since they don’t go together
easily, if you have to choose, it’s much safer to be feared than
loved. We can say this of most people: that they are ungratefuland unreliable; they lie, they fake, they’re greedy for cash andthey melt away in the face of danger. So long as you’re gener-
ous and, as I said before, not in immediate danger, they’re all
on your side: they’d shed their blood for you, they’d give youtheir belongings, their lives, their children. But when you needthem they turn their backs on you. The ruler who has reliedentirely on their promises and taken no other precautions is
lost. Friendship that comes at a price, and not because people
admire your spirit and achievements, may indeed have beenpaid for, but that doesn’t mean you really possess it and youcertainly won’t be able to count on it when you need it. Menare less worried about letting down someone who has madehimself loved than someone who makes himself feared. Love
binds when someone recognizes he should be grateful to you,
but, since men are a sad lot, gratitude is forgotten the momentit’s inconvenient. Fear means fear of punishment, and that’ssomething people never forget.
All the same, while a ruler can’t expect to inspire love
when making himself feared, he must avoid arousing hatred.Actually, being feared is perfectly compatible with not beinghated. And a ruler won’t be hated if he keeps his hands offhis subjects’ property and their women. If he really has to
have someone executed, he should only do it when he hasproper justiﬁcation and manifest cause. Above all, he mustn’tseize other people’s property. A man will sooner forget thecruelty and compassion 67
death of his father than the loss of his inheritance. Of coursethere are always reasons for taking people’s property and aruler who has started to live that way will never be short ofpretexts for grabbing more. On the other hand, reasons forexecuting a man come more rarely and pass more quickly.
But when a ruler is leading his army and commanding large
numbers of soldiers, then above all he must have no qualms
about getting a reputation for cruelty; otherwise it will be
quite impossible to keep the army united and ﬁt for combat.
One of Hannibal’s most admirable achievements was thatdespite leading a huge and decidedly multiracial army farfrom home there was never any dissent among the men or
rebellion against their leader whether in victory or defeat. The
only possible explanation for this was Hannibal’s tremendouscruelty, which, together with his countless positive qualities,meant that his soldiers always looked up to him with respectand terror. The positive qualities without the cruelty wouldn’t
have produced the same effect. Historians are just not think-
ing when they praise him for this achievement and thencondemn him for the cruelty that made it possible.
To show that Hannibal’s other qualities wouldn’t have
done the job alone we can take the case of Scipio, whose armymutinied in Spain. Scipio was an extremely rare commander
not only in his own times but in the whole of recorded history,
but he was too easy-going and as a result gave his troops afreedom that was hardly conducive to military discipline.Fabius Maximus condemned him for this in the Senate, claim-ing that he had corrupted the Roman army. When one of
his ofﬁcers sacked the town of Locri, Scipio again showed
leniency; he didn’t carry out reprisals on behalf of the towns-folk and failed to punish the ofﬁcer’s presumption, so muchso that someone defending Scipio in the Senate remarked thathe was one of those many men who don’t make mistakesthemselves, but ﬁnd it hard to punish others who do. If
Scipio had gone on leading his armies like this, with time his
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   66 28/05/2015   14:1466 the prince
All the same, a leader must think carefully before believing
and responding to certain allegations and not get frightened
over nothing. He should go about things coolly, cautiouslyand humanely: if he’s too trusting, he’ll get careless, and if hetrusts no one he’ll make himself unbearable.
These reﬂections prompt the question: is it better to be
loved rather than feared, or vice versa? The answer is that
one would prefer to be both but, since they don’t go together
easily, if you have to choose, it’s much safer to be feared than
loved. We can say this of most people: that they are ungratefuland unreliable; they lie, they fake, they’re greedy for cash andthey melt away in the face of danger. So long as you’re gener-
ous and, as I said before, not in immediate danger, they’re all
on your side: they’d shed their blood for you, they’d give youtheir belongings, their lives, their children. But when you needthem they turn their backs on you. The ruler who has reliedentirely on their promises and taken no other precautions is
lost. Friendship that comes at a price, and not because people
admire your spirit and achievements, may indeed have beenpaid for, but that doesn’t mean you really possess it and youcertainly won’t be able to count on it when you need it. Menare less worried about letting down someone who has madehimself loved than someone who makes himself feared. Love
binds when someone recognizes he should be grateful to you,
but, since men are a sad lot, gratitude is forgotten the momentit’s inconvenient. Fear means fear of punishment, and that’ssomething people never forget.
All the same, while a ruler can’t expect to inspire love
when making himself feared, he must avoid arousing hatred.Actually, being feared is perfectly compatible with not beinghated. And a ruler won’t be hated if he keeps his hands offhis subjects’ property and their women. If he really has to
have someone executed, he should only do it when he hasproper justiﬁcation and manifest cause. Above all, he mustn’tseize other people’s property. A man will sooner forget thecruelty and compassion 67
death of his father than the loss of his inheritance. Of course
there are always reasons for taking people’s property and aruler who has started to live that way will never be short ofpretexts for grabbing more. On the other hand, reasons forexecuting a man come more rarely and pass more quickly.
But when a ruler is leading his army and commanding large
numbers of soldiers, then above all he must have no qualms
about getting a reputation for cruelty; otherwise it will be
quite impossible to keep the army united and ﬁt for combat.
One of Hannibal’s most admirable achievements was thatdespite leading a huge and decidedly multiracial army farfrom home there was never any dissent among the men or
rebellion against their leader whether in victory or defeat. The
only possible explanation for this was Hannibal’s tremendouscruelty, which, together with his countless positive qualities,meant that his soldiers always looked up to him with respectand terror. The positive qualities without the cruelty wouldn’t
have produced the same effect. Historians are just not think-
ing when they praise him for this achievement and thencondemn him for the cruelty that made it possible.
To show that Hannibal’s other qualities wouldn’t have
done the job alone we can take the case of Scipio, whose armymutinied in Spain. Scipio was an extremely rare commander
not only in his own times but in the whole of recorded history,
but he was too easy-going and as a result gave his troops afreedom that was hardly conducive to military discipline.Fabius Maximus condemned him for this in the Senate, claim-ing that he had corrupted the Roman army. When one of
his ofﬁcers sacked the town of Locri, Scipio again showed
leniency; he didn’t carry out reprisals on behalf of the towns-folk and failed to punish the ofﬁcer’s presumption, so muchso that someone defending Scipio in the Senate remarked thathe was one of those many men who don’t make mistakesthemselves, but ﬁnd it hard to punish others who do. If
Scipio had gone on leading his armies like this, with time his
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   67 28/05/2015   14:1468 the prince
temperament would have undermined his fame and dimin-
ished his glory, but since he took his orders from the Senate,not only was the failing covered up but it actually enhancedhis reputation.
Going back, then, to the question of being feared or loved,
my conclusion is that since people decide for themselveswhether to love a ruler or not, while it’s the ruler who decides
whether they’re going to fear him, a sensible man will base
his power on what he controls, not on what others havefreedom to choose. But he must take care, as I said, thatpeople don’t come to hate him.18
A ruler and his promises
Everyone will appreciate how admirable it is for a ruler tokeep his word and be honest rather than deceitful. However,
in our own times we’ve had examples of leaders who’ve done
great things without worrying too much about keeping theirword. Outwitting opponents with their cunning, these menachieved more than leaders who behaved honestly.
The reader should bear in mind that there are two ways of
doing battle: using the law and using force. Typically, humans
use laws and animals force. But since playing by the law often
proves inadequate, it makes sense to resort to force as well.Hence a ruler must be able to exploit both the man and thebeast in himself to the full. In ancient times writers used fablesto teach their leaders this lesson: they tell how Achilles and
many other leaders were sent to the centaur Chiron to be fed
and brought up under his discipline. This story of having ateacher who was half-man and half-beast obviously meantthat a ruler had to be able to draw on both natures. If he hadonly one, he wouldn’t survive.
Since a ruler has to be able to act the beast, he should take
on the traits of the fox and the lion; the lion can’t defend itselfagainst snares and the fox can’t defend itself from wolves. So
you have to play the fox to see the snares and the lion to scareoff the wolves. A ruler who just plays the lion and forgets thefox doesn’t know what he’s doing. Hence a sensible leadercannot and must not keep his word if by doing so he puts
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   68 28/05/2015   14:1468 the prince
temperament would have undermined his fame and dimin-
ished his glory, but since he took his orders from the Senate,not only was the failing covered up but it actually enhancedhis reputation.
Going back, then, to the question of being feared or loved,
my conclusion is that since people decide for themselveswhether to love a ruler or not, while it’s the ruler who decides
whether they’re going to fear him, a sensible man will base
his power on what he controls, not on what others havefreedom to choose. But he must take care, as I said, thatpeople don’t come to hate him.18
A ruler and his promises
Everyone will appreciate how admirable it is for a ruler to
keep his word and be honest rather than deceitful. However,
in our own times we’ve had examples of leaders who’ve done
great things without worrying too much about keeping theirword. Outwitting opponents with their cunning, these menachieved more than leaders who behaved honestly.
The reader should bear in mind that there are two ways of
doing battle: using the law and using force. Typically, humans
use laws and animals force. But since playing by the law often
proves inadequate, it makes sense to resort to force as well.Hence a ruler must be able to exploit both the man and thebeast in himself to the full. In ancient times writers used fablesto teach their leaders this lesson: they tell how Achilles and
many other leaders were sent to the centaur Chiron to be fed
and brought up under his discipline. This story of having ateacher who was half-man and half-beast obviously meantthat a ruler had to be able to draw on both natures. If he hadonly one, he wouldn’t survive.
Since a ruler has to be able to act the beast, he should take
on the traits of the fox and the lion; the lion can’t defend itselfagainst snares and the fox can’t defend itself from wolves. So
you have to play the fox to see the snares and the lion to scareoff the wolves. A ruler who just plays the lion and forgets thefox doesn’t know what he’s doing. Hence a sensible leadercannot and must not keep his word if by doing so he puts
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   69 28/05/2015   14:1470 the prince
himself at risk, and if the reasons that made him give his word
in the ﬁrst place are no longer valid. If all men were good,
this would be bad advice, but since they are a sad lot andwon’t be keeping their promises to you, you hardly need tokeep yours to them. Anyway, a ruler will never be short ofgood reasons to explain away a broken promise. It would beeasy to cite any number of examples from modern times to
show just how many peace treaties and other commitments
have been rendered null and void by rulers not keeping theirword. Those best at playing the fox have done better than theothers. But you have to know how to disguise your slyness,how to pretend one thing and cover up another. People are
so gullible and so caught up with immediate concerns that a
con man will always ﬁnd someone ready to be conned.
There’s one recent example that really should be men-
tioned. Pope Alexander VI never did anything but con people.That was all he ever thought about. And he always found
people he could con. No one ever gave more convincing
promises than Alexander, or swore greater oaths to back themup, and no one ever kept his promises less; yet his deceptionsalways worked, because he knew this side of human natureso well.
So, a leader doesn’t have to possess all the virtuous qualities
I’ve mentioned, but it’s absolutely imperative that he seem topossess them. I’ll go so far as to say this: if he had thosequalities and observed them all the time, he’d be puttinghimself at risk. It’s seeming to be virtuous that helps; as, forexample, seeming to be compassionate, loyal, humane, honest
and religious. And you can even be those things, so long as
you’re always mentally prepared to change as soon as yourinterests are threatened. What you have to understand is thata ruler, especially a ruler new to power, can’t always behavein ways that would make people think a man good, becauseto stay in power he’s frequently obliged to act against loyalty,against charity, against humanity and against religion. Whata ruler and his promises 71
matters is that he has the sort of character that can changetack as luck and circumstances demand, and, as I’ve alreadysaid, stick to the good if he can but know how to be badwhen the occasion demands.
So a ruler must be extremely careful not to say anything
that doesn’t appear to be inspired by the ﬁve virtues listed
above; he must seem and sound wholly compassionate,
wholly loyal, wholly humane, wholly honest and wholly
religious. There is nothing more important than appearing tobe religious. In general people judge more by appearancesthan ﬁrst-hand experience, because everyone gets to see you
but hardly anyone deals with you directly. Everyone sees what
you seem to be, few have experience of who you really are,
and those few won’t have the courage to stand up to majorityopinion underwritten by the authority of state. When they’reweighing up what someone has achieved –and this is particu-
larly true with rulers, who can’t be held to account –people
look at the end result. So if a leader does what it takes towin power and keep it, his methods will always be reckonedhonourable and widely praised. The crowd is won over byappearances and ﬁnal results. And the world is all crowd: the
dissenting few ﬁnd no space so long as the majority have any
grounds at all for their opinions. There’s a certain king today*
–I’d better not call him by name –who never stops preaching
peace and trust and is actually sworn enemy to both; and if
he had ever practised either he would have lost his authorityor his kingdom many times over.
* Ferdinand of Aragon.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   70 28/05/2015   14:1470 the prince
himself at risk, and if the reasons that made him give his word
in the ﬁrst place are no longer valid. If all men were good,
this would be bad advice, but since they are a sad lot andwon’t be keeping their promises to you, you hardly need tokeep yours to them. Anyway, a ruler will never be short ofgood reasons to explain away a broken promise. It would beeasy to cite any number of examples from modern times to
show just how many peace treaties and other commitments
have been rendered null and void by rulers not keeping theirword. Those best at playing the fox have done better than theothers. But you have to know how to disguise your slyness,how to pretend one thing and cover up another. People are
so gullible and so caught up with immediate concerns that a
con man will always ﬁnd someone ready to be conned.
There’s one recent example that really should be men-
tioned. Pope Alexander VI never did anything but con people.That was all he ever thought about. And he always found
people he could con. No one ever gave more convincing
promises than Alexander, or swore greater oaths to back themup, and no one ever kept his promises less; yet his deceptionsalways worked, because he knew this side of human natureso well.
So, a leader doesn’t have to possess all the virtuous qualities
I’ve mentioned, but it’s absolutely imperative that he seem topossess them. I’ll go so far as to say this: if he had thosequalities and observed them all the time, he’d be putting
himself at risk. It’s seeming to be virtuous that helps; as, forexample, seeming to be compassionate, loyal, humane, honest
and religious. And you can even be those things, so long as
you’re always mentally prepared to change as soon as your
interests are threatened. What you have to understand is thata ruler, especially a ruler new to power, can’t always behave
in ways that would make people think a man good, becauseto stay in power he’s frequently obliged to act against loyalty,against charity, against humanity and against religion. Whata ruler and his promises 71
matters is that he has the sort of character that can change
tack as luck and circumstances demand, and, as I’ve alreadysaid, stick to the good if he can but know how to be badwhen the occasion demands.
So a ruler must be extremely careful not to say anything
that doesn’t appear to be inspired by the ﬁve virtues listed
above; he must seem and sound wholly compassionate,
wholly loyal, wholly humane, wholly honest and wholly
religious. There is nothing more important than appearing tobe religious. In general people judge more by appearancesthan ﬁrst-hand experience, because everyone gets to see you
but hardly anyone deals with you directly. Everyone sees what
you seem to be, few have experience of who you really are,
and those few won’t have the courage to stand up to majorityopinion underwritten by the authority of state. When they’reweighing up what someone has achieved –and this is particu-
larly true with rulers, who can’t be held to account –people
look at the end result. So if a leader does what it takes towin power and keep it, his methods will always be reckonedhonourable and widely praised. The crowd is won over byappearances and ﬁnal results. And the world is all crowd: the
dissenting few ﬁnd no space so long as the majority have any
grounds at all for their opinions. There’s a certain king today*
–I’d better not call him by name –who never stops preaching
peace and trust and is actually sworn enemy to both; and ifhe had ever practised either he would have lost his authorityor his kingdom many times over.
* Ferdinand of Aragon.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   71 28/05/2015   14:1419
Avoiding contempt and hatred
Now that I’ve discussed the most important of the qualities I
listed I’d like to look at the others more brieﬂy in relation to
the principle, already mentioned, that a ruler must avoid any
behaviour that will lead to his being hated or held in con-tempt; every time he manages this he’s done what a rulershould and can indulge other bad habits without worryingabout the consequences. As I’ve already said, what most leadsto a ruler being hated is seizing and stealing his subjects’
property and women; that he must not do. As long as you
don’t deprive them of property or honour most men will behappy enough and you’ll only have to watch out for theambitious few who can easily be reined back in various ways.You ’ll be held in contempt, on the other hand, if you’re seen
as changeable, superﬁcial, effeminate, fearful or indecisive.
So a ruler must avoid those qualities like so many stumblingblocks and act in such a way that everything he does gives animpression of greatness, spirit, seriousness and strength; whenpresiding over disputes between citizens he should insist that
his decision is ﬁnal and make sure no one imagines they can
trick or outwit him.
The ruler who projects this impression of himself will be
highly thought of and it’s hard to conspire against a man who
is well thought of. Then so long as he has a reputation for
excellence and is respected by his people it will be hard foroutside enemies to attack him either. A ruler must guardavoiding contempt and hatred 73
against two kinds of danger: one internal, coming from hisown people; the other external, coming from foreign powers.To defend yourself against foreign powers you need a goodarmy and good allies. And if you have a good army you’llalways have good allies, and when you’re secure againstforeign powers you’ll always be secure internally too, assum-ing there wasn’t already a conspiracy under way. Then even
when a foreign power does move against you, if you’ve lived
and organized yourself as I’ve suggested, you only have tokeep your nerve and you’ll survive any and every attack, likethe Spartan ruler Nabis in the example I gave earlier.
To get back to the internal situation: when there is no threat
from outside, a ruler must take care that his subjects don’t
start conspiring against him. He can guard against this bymaking sure he isn’t hated or despised and that people arehappy with him, all of which is very important, as I’veexplained at length. In fact, one of the most powerful prevent-
ive measures against conspiracies is simply not being hated
by a majority of the people. People planning a conspiracymust believe that killing the ruler will be popular; when theyrealize that, on the contrary, it would be unpopular theylose heart, because conspiracies are always beset with endlessdifﬁculties. Experience shows that for every successful con-
spiracy there are any number of failures. A conspirator can’t
act alone and can look for accomplices only among people hebelieves are unhappy with the situation. But as soon as hereveals his intentions to someone else he’s giving that personthe chance to improve his position, since obviously there are
all kinds of advantages to be had from betraying a conspiracy.
When you reckon that the beneﬁts of betrayal are assured,while joining a conspiracy is a risky and extremely dangerousbusiness, the man will have to be a rare friend indeed, or avery bitter enemy of the government, if he’s going to keepfaith.
To summarize: on the conspirator’s side all you have is
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   72 28/05/2015   14:1419
Avoiding contempt and hatred
Now that I’ve discussed the most important of the qualities I
listed I’d like to look at the others more brieﬂy in relation to
the principle, already mentioned, that a ruler must avoid any
behaviour that will lead to his being hated or held in con-tempt; every time he manages this he’s done what a rulershould and can indulge other bad habits without worryingabout the consequences. As I’ve already said, what most leadsto a ruler being hated is seizing and stealing his subjects’
property and women; that he must not do. As long as you
don’t deprive them of property or honour most men will behappy enough and you’ll only have to watch out for the
ambitious few who can easily be reined back in various ways.You ’ll be held in contempt, on the other hand, if you’re seen
as changeable, superﬁcial, effeminate, fearful or indecisive.So a ruler must avoid those qualities like so many stumblingblocks and act in such a way that everything he does gives animpression of greatness, spirit, seriousness and strength; whenpresiding over disputes between citizens he should insist that
his decision is ﬁnal and make sure no one imagines they can
trick or outwit him.
The ruler who projects this impression of himself will be
highly thought of and it’s hard to conspire against a man who
is well thought of. Then so long as he has a reputation forexcellence and is respected by his people it will be hard foroutside enemies to attack him either. A ruler must guardavoiding contempt and hatred 73
against two kinds of danger: one internal, coming from his
own people; the other external, coming from foreign powers.To defend yourself against foreign powers you need a goodarmy and good allies. And if you have a good army you’llalways have good allies, and when you’re secure againstforeign powers you’ll always be secure internally too, assum-ing there wasn’t already a conspiracy under way. Then even
when a foreign power does move against you, if you’ve lived
and organized yourself as I’ve suggested, you only have tokeep your nerve and you’ll survive any and every attack, likethe Spartan ruler Nabis in the example I gave earlier.
To get back to the internal situation: when there is no threat
from outside, a ruler must take care that his subjects don’tstart conspiring against him. He can guard against this bymaking sure he isn’t hated or despised and that people arehappy with him, all of which is very important, as I’veexplained at length. In fact, one of the most powerful prevent-
ive measures against conspiracies is simply not being hated
by a majority of the people. People planning a conspiracymust believe that killing the ruler will be popular; when theyrealize that, on the contrary, it would be unpopular theylose heart, because conspiracies are always beset with endlessdifﬁculties. Experience shows that for every successful con-
spiracy there are any number of failures. A conspirator can’t
act alone and can look for accomplices only among people he
believes are unhappy with the situation. But as soon as hereveals his intentions to someone else he’s giving that personthe chance to improve his position, since obviously there are
all kinds of advantages to be had from betraying a conspiracy.
When you reckon that the beneﬁts of betrayal are assured,while joining a conspiracy is a risky and extremely dangerousbusiness, the man will have to be a rare friend indeed, or avery bitter enemy of the government, if he’s going to keepfaith.
To summarize: on the conspirator’s side all you have is
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   73 28/05/2015   14:1474 the prince
fear, envy and the demoralizing prospect of punishment, while
the ruler on his side has the authority of the government andits laws plus the protection of his friends and the state. Addto all that the good will of the people and it’s extremely
unlikely that anyone will be so crazy as to start a conspiracy.Because, while in general a conspirator has most to fear priorto the coup, in this case, with the people against him, he’s
going to be in danger afterwards too and the fact that he’s seen
off the ruler doesn’t mean he can expect to escape unscathed.
I could give inﬁnite examples of this but let’s make do
with just one that happened in our fathers’ times. Annibale
Bentivogli, grandfather of the present Annibale, was Duke of
Bologna when the Canneschis conspired against him and
killed him. At that point the only surviving Bentivogli was hisson, Giovanni, who was still a baby. All the same, immediatelyafter the murder, the people rose up and killed all the Can-neschis. This was because the Bentivogli family was extremely
popular at the time. In fact, when the Bolognese realized that
with Annibale dead there were no family members capable ofruling the town, they went to Florence to get a man who wassupposedly a Bentivogli, though until shortly before that hehad passed himself off as the son of a blacksmith; they askedhim to govern Bologna and he duly did so until Giovanni was
old enough to take over.
My conclusion, then, is that so long as he has the people
on his side a ruler needn’t worry about conspiracies, but
when they are against him and hate him he’ll have to watcheveryone’s every move. Sensible rulers and well-run states
have always done all they can not to drive the nobles to
despair and to keep the people happy and satisﬁed; indeedthis is one of a ruler’s most important tasks.
One of the better organized and well-governed states in our
own times is France. It is full of good institutions whichguarantee the king’s security and freedom of action. The mostimportant of these is parliament and parliamentary authority.avoiding contempt and hatred 75
In fact the king who set up the country’s constitution wasaware of the ambition and presumption of the nobles andreckoned they needed a bit in their mouths to rein them back.He also knew how much the people hated and feared thenobles and he wanted to protect them. But it was importantthat the king shouldn’t be personally responsible for doing
this since then he might be blamed by the nobles for favouring
the people or by the people for favouring the nobles. So he
introduced an independent body, parliament, that could keepthe nobles in their place and protect the people without theking’s being responsible. There really couldn’t be a better ormore sensible institution, nor one more conducive to the
security of the king and the realm. This prompts the following
reﬂection: that a ruler must get others to carry out policiesthat will provoke protest, keeping those that inspire gratitudeto himself. In conclusion, let me repeat that a ruler shouldrespect the nobles but must make sure he is not hated by the
people.
Perhaps many readers familiar with the fate of certain
Roman emperors will feel that their examples contradict these
opinions of mine, in that they consistently behaved well andshowed great character but nevertheless lost their empire oreven their lives at the hands of subjects who conspired against
them. To meet these objections, I shall consider the qualities
of some of these emperors, showing how the causes of theirdownfall are not at all out of line with my reasoning above,and bringing into the argument some of the context thathistorians of the period consider important. I hope it will be
enough to take all the emperors who held power from the
philosopher Marcus Aurelius down to Maximinus, which isto say: Marcus, his son Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus,Antoninus Caracalla his son, Macrinus, Heliogabalus,Alexander and Maximinus.
The ﬁrst thing to note is that, while in other states a ruler
has only to guard against the ambition of the nobles and
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   74 28/05/2015   14:1474 the prince
fear, envy and the demoralizing prospect of punishment, while
the ruler on his side has the authority of the government andits laws plus the protection of his friends and the state. Addto all that the good will of the people and it’s extremely
unlikely that anyone will be so crazy as to start a conspiracy.Because, while in general a conspirator has most to fear priorto the coup, in this case, with the people against him, he’s
going to be in danger afterwards too and the fact that he’s seen
off the ruler doesn’t mean he can expect to escape unscathed.
I could give inﬁnite examples of this but let’s make do
with just one that happened in our fathers’ times. Annibale
Bentivogli, grandfather of the present Annibale, was Duke of
Bologna when the Canneschis conspired against him and
killed him. At that point the only surviving Bentivogli was hisson, Giovanni, who was still a baby. All the same, immediatelyafter the murder, the people rose up and killed all the Can-neschis. This was because the Bentivogli family was extremely
popular at the time. In fact, when the Bolognese realized that
with Annibale dead there were no family members capable ofruling the town, they went to Florence to get a man who wassupposedly a Bentivogli, though until shortly before that hehad passed himself off as the son of a blacksmith; they askedhim to govern Bologna and he duly did so until Giovanni was
old enough to take over.
My conclusion, then, is that so long as he has the people
on his side a ruler needn’t worry about conspiracies, but
when they are against him and hate him he’ll have to watcheveryone’s every move. Sensible rulers and well-run states
have always done all they can not to drive the nobles to
despair and to keep the people happy and satisﬁed; indeedthis is one of a ruler’s most important tasks.
One of the better organized and well-governed states in our
own times is France. It is full of good institutions whichguarantee the king’s security and freedom of action. The mostimportant of these is parliament and parliamentary authority.avoiding contempt and hatred 75
In fact the king who set up the country’s constitution was
aware of the ambition and presumption of the nobles andreckoned they needed a bit in their mouths to rein them back.He also knew how much the people hated and feared thenobles and he wanted to protect them. But it was importantthat the king shouldn’t be personally responsible for doingthis since then he might be blamed by the nobles for favouring
the people or by the people for favouring the nobles. So he
introduced an independent body, parliament, that could keepthe nobles in their place and protect the people without theking’s being responsible. There really couldn’t be a better or
more sensible institution, nor one more conducive to the
security of the king and the realm. This prompts the following
reﬂection: that a ruler must get others to carry out policiesthat will provoke protest, keeping those that inspire gratitudeto himself. In conclusion, let me repeat that a ruler shouldrespect the nobles but must make sure he is not hated by the
people.
Perhaps many readers familiar with the fate of certain
Roman emperors will feel that their examples contradict these
opinions of mine, in that they consistently behaved well andshowed great character but nevertheless lost their empire oreven their lives at the hands of subjects who conspired against
them. To meet these objections, I shall consider the qualities
of some of these emperors, showing how the causes of theirdownfall are not at all out of line with my reasoning above,and bringing into the argument some of the context thathistorians of the period consider important. I hope it will be
enough to take all the emperors who held power from the
philosopher Marcus Aurelius down to Maximinus, which isto say: Marcus, his son Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus,Antoninus Caracalla his son, Macrinus, Heliogabalus,Alexander and Maximinus.
The ﬁrst thing to note is that, while in other states a ruler
has only to guard against the ambition of the nobles and
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   75 28/05/2015   14:1476 the prince
the disrespect of the people, Roman emperors faced a third
hazard: the greed and cruelty of the army. This was such atough problem that it proved the downfall of many emperors,because it was so hard to keep both the people and the armyhappy. The people were for a quiet life and hence lovedlow-proﬁle leaders, while the soldiers loved leaders with mili-tary ambitions, men who were brazen, grasping and cruel;
they wanted the emperor to unleash these qualities on the
people so that they could double their incomes and give ventto their own greed and cruelty.
As a result, emperors who for lack of natural authority or
political ﬂair didn’t have the kind of standing that could hold
both soldiers and people in check always ended badly. Whenthey saw how difﬁcult it was to deal with these conﬂictingdemands, most of them, and especially those new to power,chose to satisfy the army and more or less ignored the people’ssuffering. It was a policy dictated by necessity: if a ruler can’t
avoid hatred altogether, he must ﬁrst try to avoid the hatred
of the country as a whole, and when that proves impossible
he must do everything he can to escape the hatred of theclasses that wield the most power. So emperors new to theirpositions and in need of special support turned to the armyrather than the people, a policy that worked for as long as
they were able to maintain their prestige in the eyes of the
soldiers.
This is why, although Marcus, Pertinax and Alexander
were benign, humane men, who led unassuming lives, lovingjustice and hating cruelty, only Marcus managed to avoid a
sad end and still commanded respect at his death. This was
because he succeeded to the emperor’s throne by hereditaryright and owed nothing to either the soldiers or the people.Possessing many good qualities that aroused general admir-ation, he kept both the people and the army in their placethroughout his reign and was never either hated or despised.But Pertinax was made emperor against the army’s will; underavoiding contempt and hatred 77
Commodus the soldiers had got used to a degenerate lifestyleand wouldn’t accept the standards of honesty Pertinax triedto impose on them. This aroused their hatred and since Perti-nax was also despised for being old he was soon overthrown.
In this regard it’s worth noting that you can be hated just
as much for the good you do as the bad, which is why, as Isaid before, a ruler who wants to stay in power is often forced
not to be good. Because when a powerful group –whether
they be the common people, the army or the nobility –is
corrupt, then if you reckon you need their support you’ll have
to play to their mood and keep them happy, and at that pointany good you do will only put you at risk. But let’s move on
to Alexander. He was such a good man that among the many
things he was praised for was the fact that over fourteen yearsin power he never had anyone executed without a trial. Allthe same, people despised him; they thought him effeminateand said he let his mother run the show; as a result the army
conspired against him and killed him.
Going to the opposite extreme and looking at the characters
of Commodus, Severus, Antoninus Caracalla and Maximinus,
weﬁnd they were extremely cruel and grasping; to keep the
army happy they committed every crime a leader can commitagainst his people and all of them, with the exception of
Severus, came to a sad end. Severus had such a strong character
that though he tyrannized the people to keep the army friendlyhe was always able to govern with success; his qualitiesamazed and awed the people, impressed and pleased the army,so that both groups in their different ways admired him.
Since, for a man who took power rather than inheriting it,
Severus achieved such a lot, I’d like very brieﬂy to show howwell he was able to play both the fox and the lion, animalsthat, as I said, a ruler must learn to imitate.
Aware that the emperor Julian was weak and indecisive,
Severus persuaded the army he commanded in Slavonia tomarch on Rome and avenge Pertinax, who had been murdered
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   76 28/05/2015   14:1476 the prince
the disrespect of the people, Roman emperors faced a third
hazard: the greed and cruelty of the army. This was such atough problem that it proved the downfall of many emperors,because it was so hard to keep both the people and the armyhappy. The people were for a quiet life and hence lovedlow-proﬁle leaders, while the soldiers loved leaders with mili-tary ambitions, men who were brazen, grasping and cruel;
they wanted the emperor to unleash these qualities on the
people so that they could double their incomes and give ventto their own greed and cruelty.
As a result, emperors who for lack of natural authority or
political ﬂair didn’t have the kind of standing that could hold
both soldiers and people in check always ended badly. Whenthey saw how difﬁcult it was to deal with these conﬂictingdemands, most of them, and especially those new to power,chose to satisfy the army and more or less ignored the people’ssuffering. It was a policy dictated by necessity: if a ruler can’t
avoid hatred altogether, he must ﬁrst try to avoid the hatred
of the country as a whole, and when that proves impossiblehe must do everything he can to escape the hatred of theclasses that wield the most power. So emperors new to theirpositions and in need of special support turned to the armyrather than the people, a policy that worked for as long as
they were able to maintain their prestige in the eyes of the
soldiers.
This is why, although Marcus, Pertinax and Alexander
were benign, humane men, who led unassuming lives, lovingjustice and hating cruelty, only Marcus managed to avoid a
sad end and still commanded respect at his death. This was
because he succeeded to the emperor’s throne by hereditaryright and owed nothing to either the soldiers or the people.Possessing many good qualities that aroused general admir-ation, he kept both the people and the army in their placethroughout his reign and was never either hated or despised.But Pertinax was made emperor against the army’s will; underavoiding contempt and hatred 77
Commodus the soldiers had got used to a degenerate lifestyle
and wouldn’t accept the standards of honesty Pertinax triedto impose on them. This aroused their hatred and since Perti-nax was also despised for being old he was soon overthrown.
In this regard it’s worth noting that you can be hated just
as much for the good you do as the bad, which is why, as Isaid before, a ruler who wants to stay in power is often forced
not to be good. Because when a powerful group –whether
they be the common people, the army or the nobility –is
corrupt, then if you reckon you need their support you’ll have
to play to their mood and keep them happy, and at that pointany good you do will only put you at risk. But let’s move on
to Alexander. He was such a good man that among the many
things he was praised for was the fact that over fourteen yearsin power he never had anyone executed without a trial. Allthe same, people despised him; they thought him effeminateand said he let his mother run the show; as a result the army
conspired against him and killed him.
Going to the opposite extreme and looking at the characters
of Commodus, Severus, Antoninus Caracalla and Maximinus,
weﬁnd they were extremely cruel and grasping; to keep the
army happy they committed every crime a leader can commitagainst his people and all of them, with the exception of
Severus, came to a sad end. Severus had such a strong character
that though he tyrannized the people to keep the army friendlyhe was always able to govern with success; his qualitiesamazed and awed the people, impressed and pleased the army,so that both groups in their different ways admired him.
Since, for a man who took power rather than inheriting it,
Severus achieved such a lot, I’d like very brieﬂy to show howwell he was able to play both the fox and the lion, animalsthat, as I said, a ruler must learn to imitate.
Aware that the emperor Julian was weak and indecisive,
Severus persuaded the army he commanded in Slavonia tomarch on Rome and avenge Pertinax, who had been murdered
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   77 28/05/2015   14:1478 the prince
by the Praetorian Guard. With this pretext and betraying no
sign of any ambition to become emperor, he led his armytowards Rome and was already in Italy before people realizedhe’d set out. When he arrived in Rome, the Senate, out offear, elected him emperor and had Julian killed. Having gotthus far, Severus faced two obstacles if he was to take com-plete control of the empire: one in Asia, where the commander
of the Asian armies, Pescennius Niger, had declared himself
emperor; and the other in the west, where Albinus also aspiredto become emperor. Deciding it would be dangerous to showhe was hostile to both opponents at once, Severus chose toattack Niger and trick Albinus. So he wrote to Albinus, in
France, saying that now that the Senate had elected him
emperor he wanted to share the honour with him, Albinus.He sent him the title of Caesar and had the Senate vote tomake him co-emperor. Albinus was taken in, but as soon asSeverus had defeated and killed Niger and got control of the
eastern empire, he went back to Rome and complained in the
Senate that Albinus, far from being grateful for everythingSeverus had given him, had set a trap to kill him; as a result,he, Severus, would have to go and punish his ingratitude. Infact he went to France, stripped Albinus of his power and hadhim killed.
If we look carefully at what Severus did, we ﬁnd he played
both the ferocious lion and the cunning fox very well; he wasfeared and respected by all parties and he managed to avoidbeing hated by the army. It’s hardly surprising, then, thatdespite being a new arrival he was able to hold so much
power: his enormous reputation always protected him from
the hatred people might otherwise have felt as a result of hispillage and violence.
Severus’s son, Antoninus, was also a man with some excel-
lent qualities; the people thought him remarkable and thearmy welcomed him. He was a warlike leader, capable ofhandling every hardship and contemptuous of ﬁne foods andavoiding contempt and hatred 79
easy living of any kind. So the army loved him. But his crueltyand ferocity were overwhelming and unspeakable, to theextent that, after endless individual murders, he wiped outmuch of the population of Rome and all the people of Alexan-dria. At this point everybody really hated him and even thoseclose to him began to get nervous so that in the end he waskilled by a centurion while among his soldiers.
It’s worth noting that assassinations like this, coming as
they do when a determined man takes a considered decision,are bound to happen to rulers sometimes, if only because,once a person no longer cares about dying, he’s free to strike.That said, a ruler shouldn’t be too concerned, because such
murders are extremely rare. He must just take care not to do
a serious injustice to any of the men he has serving him orkeeps beside him to run the state. Antoninus in fact had killedthe centurion’s brother in disgraceful circumstances and wasthreatening the man himself every day, yet still kept him in
his bodyguard. It was the kind of rash behaviour that can,
and in this case did, lead to disaster.
But let’s turn to Commodus, who could so easily have held
on to the empire. Son of Marcus Aurelius, Commodus cameto power by hereditary right; all he had to do was follow inhis father’s footsteps and he would have been welcome to
army and people alike. But the man was cruel, bestially so,
and to unleash his appetite and greed on the people he setabout currying favour with the soldiers and corrupting them.He had no self-respect either and would often go down to theﬂoor of the amphitheatre to ﬁght the gladiators. He did so
many things that were sordid and unworthy of an emperorthat his soldiers found him contemptible, until, hated by thepeople and despised by the army, he eventually fell victim toa conspiracy.
Which leaves Maximinus. He was a real warmonger. As I
said earlier on, the armies had been frustrated with the effem-inate Alexander, and when they’d got rid of him they elected
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   78 28/05/2015   14:1478 the prince
by the Praetorian Guard. With this pretext and betraying no
sign of any ambition to become emperor, he led his armytowards Rome and was already in Italy before people realizedhe’d set out. When he arrived in Rome, the Senate, out offear, elected him emperor and had Julian killed. Having gotthus far, Severus faced two obstacles if he was to take com-plete control of the empire: one in Asia, where the commander
of the Asian armies, Pescennius Niger, had declared himself
emperor; and the other in the west, where Albinus also aspiredto become emperor. Deciding it would be dangerous to showhe was hostile to both opponents at once, Severus chose toattack Niger and trick Albinus. So he wrote to Albinus, in
France, saying that now that the Senate had elected him
emperor he wanted to share the honour with him, Albinus.He sent him the title of Caesar and had the Senate vote tomake him co-emperor. Albinus was taken in, but as soon asSeverus had defeated and killed Niger and got control of the
eastern empire, he went back to Rome and complained in the
Senate that Albinus, far from being grateful for everythingSeverus had given him, had set a trap to kill him; as a result,he, Severus, would have to go and punish his ingratitude. Infact he went to France, stripped Albinus of his power and hadhim killed.
If we look carefully at what Severus did, we ﬁnd he played
both the ferocious lion and the cunning fox very well; he wasfeared and respected by all parties and he managed to avoidbeing hated by the army. It’s hardly surprising, then, thatdespite being a new arrival he was able to hold so much
power: his enormous reputation always protected him from
the hatred people might otherwise have felt as a result of hispillage and violence.
Severus’s son, Antoninus, was also a man with some excel-
lent qualities; the people thought him remarkable and thearmy welcomed him. He was a warlike leader, capable ofhandling every hardship and contemptuous of ﬁne foods andavoiding contempt and hatred 79
easy living of any kind. So the army loved him. But his cruelty
and ferocity were overwhelming and unspeakable, to theextent that, after endless individual murders, he wiped outmuch of the population of Rome and all the people of Alexan-dria. At this point everybody really hated him and even thoseclose to him began to get nervous so that in the end he waskilled by a centurion while among his soldiers.
It’s worth noting that assassinations like this, coming as
they do when a determined man takes a considered decision,are bound to happen to rulers sometimes, if only because,once a person no longer cares about dying, he’s free to strike.That said, a ruler shouldn’t be too concerned, because such
murders are extremely rare. He must just take care not to do
a serious injustice to any of the men he has serving him orkeeps beside him to run the state. Antoninus in fact had killedthe centurion’s brother in disgraceful circumstances and wasthreatening the man himself every day, yet still kept him in
his bodyguard. It was the kind of rash behaviour that can,
and in this case did, lead to disaster.
But let’s turn to Commodus, who could so easily have held
on to the empire. Son of Marcus Aurelius, Commodus cameto power by hereditary right; all he had to do was follow inhis father’s footsteps and he would have been welcome to
army and people alike. But the man was cruel, bestially so,
and to unleash his appetite and greed on the people he setabout currying favour with the soldiers and corrupting them.He had no self-respect either and would often go down to theﬂoor of the amphitheatre to ﬁght the gladiators. He did so
many things that were sordid and unworthy of an emperorthat his soldiers found him contemptible, until, hated by thepeople and despised by the army, he eventually fell victim toa conspiracy.
Which leaves Maximinus. He was a real warmonger. As I
said earlier on, the armies had been frustrated with the effem-inate Alexander, and when they’d got rid of him they elected
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   79 28/05/2015   14:1480 the prince
Maximinus in his place. But he didn’t last long. Two things
led to his being both hated and despised. First, his extremelylowly background: he had been a shepherd in Thrace –every-
body knew it and thought it scandalous; second, on becomingemperor he had put off going to Rome for the formal investi-ture and got himself a reputation for extreme cruelty byordering his prefects in Rome and all over the empire to
carry out numerous atrocities. Universally despised for his
low birth, hated and feared for his ferocity, he faced rebellionsﬁrst in Africa, then in the Senate; the Senate rebellion wassupported by the entire population of Rome. Then the wholeof Italy conspired against him, until ﬁnally his own army got
involved; they were laying siege to Aquileia and ﬁnding it
tough going; they were also fed up with his cruelty and whenthey realized how many enemies he had they became lessafraid of the man and killed him.
I don’t want to talk about Heliogabalus, Macrinus or
Julian, who were all intensely despised and swiftly dispatched.Instead I’ll conclude this discussion with the reﬂection thatcontemporary rulers do not have to give the same priority tosatisfying the army that the Roman emperors did. True, onedoes have to pay the army some attention, but the problem issoon resolved, because none of today’s rulers has to live
with armies that have long experience in the government and
administration of the provinces, as the armies of the Romanempire did. If the emperors had to put their armies before thepeople it was because the armies were the more powerful.These days it is more important for all rulers, with the excep-
tions of the Turkish and Egyptian sultans, to put the people
before the army, because the people are more powerful.
I’ve made an exception of the Turkish leader because he
keeps an army of 12,000 infantry and 15,000 cavalry beside
him. Depending on them as he does for the strength andsecurity of his realm he has to put their good will before anyother consideration. In the same way, Egypt is entirely at theavoiding contempt and hatred 81
mercy of its army and again the sultan has to satisfy thesoldiers before worrying about the people. It’s worth notingthat Egypt is a unique case; it is similar to the papal state,which can’t be classiﬁed as a hereditary monarchy or as anew monarchy. When the old ruler dies he is not replaced byone of his children, but a new leader is elected by a bodyvested with this authority. Since the state’s institutions are
well established, this can hardly be compared with a situation
where a new ruler seizes a state, and in fact a pope or Egyptiansultan faces none of the difﬁculties that a new ruler usuallyfaces, because although he may be new to power the insti-tutions are old and set up to work on his behalf as if he were
a hereditary king.
But let’s get back to our discussion. I’m sure that anyone
reﬂecting on what I’ve said will see that it was hatred or
contempt that led to the downfall of these Roman emperors;they will also understand how it was that, while some behaved
one way and some another, there were nevertheless successes
and failures in both groups. Since they had seized rather thaninherited power, it was futile and dangerous for Pertinaxand Alexander to try to imitate Marcus Aurelius, who hadinherited his position; similarly, since they didn’t have thenecessary qualities, it was a fatal mistake for Caracalla, Com-
modus and Maximinus to imitate Severus. Though a man
who has seized power and is establishing a new monarchycannot imitate the likes of Marcus Aurelius, that doesn’t meanhe has to behave like Severus. What he must take from Severusare the policies you need to found a state, and from Marcus
the policies that bring stability and glory once the state is
ﬁrmly established.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   80 28/05/2015   14:1480 the prince
Maximinus in his place. But he didn’t last long. Two things
led to his being both hated and despised. First, his extremelylowly background: he had been a shepherd in Thrace –every-
body knew it and thought it scandalous; second, on becomingemperor he had put off going to Rome for the formal investi-ture and got himself a reputation for extreme cruelty byordering his prefects in Rome and all over the empire to
carry out numerous atrocities. Universally despised for his
low birth, hated and feared for his ferocity, he faced rebellionsﬁrst in Africa, then in the Senate; the Senate rebellion wassupported by the entire population of Rome. Then the wholeof Italy conspired against him, until ﬁnally his own army got
involved; they were laying siege to Aquileia and ﬁnding it
tough going; they were also fed up with his cruelty and whenthey realized how many enemies he had they became lessafraid of the man and killed him.
I don’t want to talk about Heliogabalus, Macrinus or
Julian, who were all intensely despised and swiftly dispatched.Instead I’ll conclude this discussion with the reﬂection thatcontemporary rulers do not have to give the same priority tosatisfying the army that the Roman emperors did. True, onedoes have to pay the army some attention, but the problem issoon resolved, because none of today’s rulers has to live
with armies that have long experience in the government andadministration of the provinces, as the armies of the Romanempire did. If the emperors had to put their armies before thepeople it was because the armies were the more powerful.These days it is more important for all rulers, with the excep-
tions of the Turkish and Egyptian sultans, to put the people
before the army, because the people are more powerful.
I’ve made an exception of the Turkish leader because he
keeps an army of 12,000 infantry and 15,000 cavalry beside
him. Depending on them as he does for the strength andsecurity of his realm he has to put their good will before anyother consideration. In the same way, Egypt is entirely at theavoiding contempt and hatred 81
mercy of its army and again the sultan has to satisfy the
soldiers before worrying about the people. It’s worth notingthat Egypt is a unique case; it is similar to the papal state,which can’t be classiﬁed as a hereditary monarchy or as anew monarchy. When the old ruler dies he is not replaced byone of his children, but a new leader is elected by a bodyvested with this authority. Since the state’s institutions are
well established, this can hardly be compared with a situation
where a new ruler seizes a state, and in fact a pope or Egyptiansultan faces none of the difﬁculties that a new ruler usuallyfaces, because although he may be new to power the insti-tutions are old and set up to work on his behalf as if he were
a hereditary king.
But let’s get back to our discussion. I’m sure that anyone
reﬂecting on what I’ve said will see that it was hatred or
contempt that led to the downfall of these Roman emperors;they will also understand how it was that, while some behaved
one way and some another, there were nevertheless successes
and failures in both groups. Since they had seized rather thaninherited power, it was futile and dangerous for Pertinaxand Alexander to try to imitate Marcus Aurelius, who hadinherited his position; similarly, since they didn’t have thenecessary qualities, it was a fatal mistake for Caracalla, Com-
modus and Maximinus to imitate Severus. Though a man
who has seized power and is establishing a new monarchycannot imitate the likes of Marcus Aurelius, that doesn’t meanhe has to behave like Severus. What he must take from Severusare the policies you need to found a state, and from Marcus
the policies that bring stability and glory once the state is
ﬁrmly established.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   81 28/05/2015   14:1420
Whether fortresses and other strategies
rulers frequently adopt are useful
To hold power more securely, some rulers have disarmed
their citizens; some have kept subject towns divided in fac-
tions; some have encouraged hostility towards themselves;
others have sought to win over those who were initially sus-picious of their rise to power; some have built fortresses;others have torn them down and destroyed them. And thoughone can’t pass ﬁnal judgement on these policies without
detailed knowledge of the states where such decisions were
taken, all the same I shall try to discuss the matter in general
terms as far as is possible.
No one new to power has ever disarmed his subjects; on
the contrary, ﬁnding them disarmed new rulers have always
armed them. When you’re the one giving people arms, those
arms become yours; men who were potentially hostile become
loyal, while those already loyal become your supporters ratherthan just your subjects. It’s true you can’t arm everyone, but
in favouring some you can feel safer about the others too.Seeing that they’ve been preferred, the men you’ve armed will
be under an obligation to you. The others won’t be resentful,
understanding that the people facing danger for you andbinding their lives to yours will inevitably deserve the greaterrewards. But when you take arms away from people, thenyou start to upset them; you show you don’t trust thembecause you’re frightened or cagey. Either way, they’ll begin
to hate you. Then, since you can hardly manage without anwhether fortresses and other strategies are useful 83
army, you’ll have to turn to mercenary forces, which willhave all the failings I discussed earlier. And even if yourmercenaries are good, they’ll never be good enough to defendyou against powerful enemies and a hostile people.
So, as I said, a new ruler in a newly constituted state has
always armed his subjects. History offers endless examples.But when a ruler acquires a new territory to add like an extra
limb to an existing state, then he must disarm its people,
except for the men who supported him when he took it. Butwith time and opportunity even those men should be keptweak and emasculated so that all the real armed force in thestate as a whole resides with your own soldiers who live with
you in your home base.
Generations ago, the experts in Florence used to say that
you had to hold Pistoia by playing on its factions and Pisa by
holding its fortresses. So they encouraged factionalism insome of the towns they held, the better to control them. In
times when there was a certain balance between opposing
parties in Italy this was probably an effective policy, but Idon’t think we should take it as a rule today. I don’t think
factional divisions ever really improved the situation. On thecontrary, when an enemy approaches, a subject town that’sdivided in factions will fall at once. The weaker of the factions
will always join forces with the attacker and the other faction
won’t be strong enough to beat them both.
The Venetians were reasoning along the same lines, I
believe, when they fomented divisions between Guelphs andGhibellines in the towns they held; they didn’t let the factions
get as far as bloodshed but encouraged divergences so that
people would be too busy with their own disputes to uniteagainst Venice. It wasn’t, as things turned out, a successfulpolicy. After the Venetians’ defeat at Vaila `, one or other of
the factions immediately took courage and seized controlof the various towns. This kind of policy actually indicatesweakness on a ruler’s part; in a healthy, conﬁdent state such
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   82 28/05/2015   14:1420
Whether fortresses and other strategies
rulers frequently adopt are useful
To hold power more securely, some rulers have disarmed
their citizens; some have kept subject towns divided in fac-
tions; some have encouraged hostility towards themselves;
others have sought to win over those who were initially sus-picious of their rise to power; some have built fortresses;others have torn them down and destroyed them. And thoughone can’t pass ﬁnal judgement on these policies without
detailed knowledge of the states where such decisions were
taken, all the same I shall try to discuss the matter in general
terms as far as is possible.
No one new to power has ever disarmed his subjects; on
the contrary, ﬁnding them disarmed new rulers have always
armed them. When you’re the one giving people arms, those
arms become yours; men who were potentially hostile become
loyal, while those already loyal become your supporters ratherthan just your subjects. It’s true you can’t arm everyone, but
in favouring some you can feel safer about the others too.Seeing that they’ve been preferred, the men you’ve armed will
be under an obligation to you. The others won’t be resentful,
understanding that the people facing danger for you andbinding their lives to yours will inevitably deserve the greaterrewards. But when you take arms away from people, thenyou start to upset them; you show you don’t trust thembecause you’re frightened or cagey. Either way, they’ll begin
to hate you. Then, since you can hardly manage without anwhether fortresses and other strategies are useful 83
army, you’ll have to turn to mercenary forces, which will
have all the failings I discussed earlier. And even if yourmercenaries are good, they’ll never be good enough to defendyou against powerful enemies and a hostile people.
So, as I said, a new ruler in a newly constituted state has
always armed his subjects. History offers endless examples.But when a ruler acquires a new territory to add like an extra
limb to an existing state, then he must disarm its people,
except for the men who supported him when he took it. Butwith time and opportunity even those men should be keptweak and emasculated so that all the real armed force in thestate as a whole resides with your own soldiers who live with
you in your home base.
Generations ago, the experts in Florence used to say that
you had to hold Pistoia by playing on its factions and Pisa by
holding its fortresses. So they encouraged factionalism insome of the towns they held, the better to control them. In
times when there was a certain balance between opposing
parties in Italy this was probably an effective policy, but Idon’t think we should take it as a rule today. I don’t thinkfactional divisions ever really improved the situation. On thecontrary, when an enemy approaches, a subject town that’sdivided in factions will fall at once. The weaker of the factions
will always join forces with the attacker and the other faction
won’t be strong enough to beat them both.
The Venetians were reasoning along the same lines, I
believe, when they fomented divisions between Guelphs andGhibellines in the towns they held; they didn’t let the factions
get as far as bloodshed but encouraged divergences so thatpeople would be too busy with their own disputes to uniteagainst Venice. It wasn’t, as things turned out, a successfulpolicy. After the Venetians’ defeat at Vaila `, one or other of
the factions immediately took courage and seized controlof the various towns. This kind of policy actually indicatesweakness on a ruler’s part; in a healthy, conﬁdent state such
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   83 28/05/2015   14:1484 the prince
differences would never be allowed; they are only useful in
peacetime when they make it easier to keep people undercontrol. In times of war everyone can see how ﬂawed the
policy is.
There’s no doubt that rulers achieve greatness by over-
coming the obstacles and enemies they ﬁnd in their path. So
when destiny wants to make a ruler great, particularly a new
ruler who, unlike a hereditary king, really needs to build up
his reputation, it sends him enemies and prompts them toattack him. That way he has the chance to beat them andclimb the ladder his enemies have put in front of him. Hencemany people reckon that when the opportunity presents itself
a smart ruler will shrewdly provoke hostility so that he can
then increase his reputation by crushing it.
Rulers, and especially those new to power, have found that
men they initially doubted prove more loyal and useful thanthose they trusted. Pandolfo Petrucci ran Siena more with the
men he had doubted than the others. But it’s hard to lay down
ﬁrm rules here because things vary from case to case. I’ll justsay this: that a ruler can very easily win over men whoopposed him when he came to power, if they are not in aposition to support themselves with their own resources.They’ll be forced to behave more loyally than others in that
they know they have to work hard to offset the negative
impression the ruler initially had of them. So a ruler canalways get more out of such men than out of people who feeltoo safe in his service and don’t really make an effort.
Since the discussion demands it, I wouldn’t like to leave
out a reminder to any ruler who has taken a new state withinside help that he must think hard about why the local peoplewho helped him did so. If they didn’t act out of naturalfriendship for the new ruler, but only because the previousgovernment wasn’t giving them what they wanted, it willbe extremely demanding and difﬁcult to keep their support,because the new ruler won’t be able to give them what theywhether fortresses and other strategies are useful 85
want either. Looking carefully at the reasons for this anddrawing on the examples available from ancient and modernhistory, we ﬁnd that it is much easier to win over those who
were content with the previous government, and hence yourenemies, than the men who were not content and so made analliance with you and helped you take the country.
One way rulers have tried to secure their power is by build-
ing fortresses to curb and discourage potential aggressors andto offer a safe refuge in case of sudden attack. I approve ofthis policy, if only because it has been used for centuries. Allthe same, there is the recent example of Niccolo `Vitelli who
demolished two fortresses in Citta `di Castello in order to hold
the town. When Guidobaldo retook possession of his landsafter Cesare Borgia’s occupation, he razed every fortress in
the state to the ground, convinced that he’d be less likely tolose it again without them. And when the Bentivoglio familyreturned to power in Bologna it did the same thing. So,
whether fortresses are useful or not will depend on the circum-
stances; in one situation they’ll be a help and in another they’llbe dangerous. We can sum up the reasons for this as follows.
The ruler who is more afraid of his people than of foreign
enemies must build fortresses; but the ruler who is moreafraid of foreign enemies should do without them. The castle
Francesco Sforza built in Milan has provoked and will go on
provoking more rebellions against the Sforza family than anyother cause of unrest in the whole state. Your best fortress isnot to be hated by the people, because even if you do havefortresses, they won’t save you if the people hate you. Once
the people have decided to take up arms against you they’ll
never be short of foreign support. In recent times there are noexamples of fortresses having proved useful to any ruler atall, with the exception of the Countess of Forlı `, Caterina
Sforza, when her husband, Count Girolamo Riario, was mur-dered. Taking refuge in the fortress, she was able to survivethe rebels’ assault, wait till help came from Milan, then take
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   84 28/05/2015   14:1484 the prince
differences would never be allowed; they are only useful in
peacetime when they make it easier to keep people undercontrol. In times of war everyone can see how ﬂawed the
policy is.
There’s no doubt that rulers achieve greatness by over-
coming the obstacles and enemies they ﬁnd in their path. So
when destiny wants to make a ruler great, particularly a new
ruler who, unlike a hereditary king, really needs to build up
his reputation, it sends him enemies and prompts them toattack him. That way he has the chance to beat them andclimb the ladder his enemies have put in front of him. Hencemany people reckon that when the opportunity presents itself
a smart ruler will shrewdly provoke hostility so that he can
then increase his reputation by crushing it.
Rulers, and especially those new to power, have found that
men they initially doubted prove more loyal and useful thanthose they trusted. Pandolfo Petrucci ran Siena more with the
men he had doubted than the others. But it’s hard to lay down
ﬁrm rules here because things vary from case to case. I’ll just
say this: that a ruler can very easily win over men whoopposed him when he came to power, if they are not in aposition to support themselves with their own resources.They’ll be forced to behave more loyally than others in that
they know they have to work hard to offset the negative
impression the ruler initially had of them. So a ruler canalways get more out of such men than out of people who feeltoo safe in his service and don’t really make an effort.
Since the discussion demands it, I wouldn’t like to leave
out a reminder to any ruler who has taken a new state withinside help that he must think hard about why the local peoplewho helped him did so. If they didn’t act out of naturalfriendship for the new ruler, but only because the previousgovernment wasn’t giving them what they wanted, it willbe extremely demanding and difﬁcult to keep their support,because the new ruler won’t be able to give them what theywhether fortresses and other strategies are useful 85
want either. Looking carefully at the reasons for this and
drawing on the examples available from ancient and modernhistory, we ﬁnd that it is much easier to win over those who
were content with the previous government, and hence yourenemies, than the men who were not content and so made analliance with you and helped you take the country.
One way rulers have tried to secure their power is by build-
ing fortresses to curb and discourage potential aggressors andto offer a safe refuge in case of sudden attack. I approve ofthis policy, if only because it has been used for centuries. Allthe same, there is the recent example of Niccolo `Vitelli who
demolished two fortresses in Citta `di Castello in order to hold
the town. When Guidobaldo retook possession of his landsafter Cesare Borgia’s occupation, he razed every fortress inthe state to the ground, convinced that he’d be less likely tolose it again without them. And when the Bentivoglio familyreturned to power in Bologna it did the same thing. So,
whether fortresses are useful or not will depend on the circum-
stances; in one situation they’ll be a help and in another they’ll
be dangerous. We can sum up the reasons for this as follows.
The ruler who is more afraid of his people than of foreign
enemies must build fortresses; but the ruler who is moreafraid of foreign enemies should do without them. The castle
Francesco Sforza built in Milan has provoked and will go on
provoking more rebellions against the Sforza family than anyother cause of unrest in the whole state. Your best fortress isnot to be hated by the people, because even if you do havefortresses, they won’t save you if the people hate you. Once
the people have decided to take up arms against you they’ll
never be short of foreign support. In recent times there are noexamples of fortresses having proved useful to any ruler atall, with the exception of the Countess of Forlı `, Caterina
Sforza, when her husband, Count Girolamo Riario, was mur-dered. Taking refuge in the fortress, she was able to survivethe rebels’ assault, wait till help came from Milan, then take
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   85 28/05/2015   14:1486 the prince
control again. Circumstances were such at the time that no
foreign enemies were in a position to help the people. Later,however, her fortresses were not much use when CesareBorgia attacked the town, and the people, who were hostileto her, fought on his side. Both then and earlier she wouldhave been safer had she avoided making an enemy of thepeople rather than counting on fortresses. All things con-
sidered, I’ll give my approval both to rulers who build fort-
resses and to those who don’t, but I’ll always criticize any
ruler who imagines it doesn’t matter whether the people hatehim or not and trusts in fortresses for his security.21
What a ruler should do to win respect
Nothing wins a ruler respect like great military victories anda display of remarkable personal qualities. One example in
our own times is Ferdinand of Aragon, the present King of
Spain. One might almost describe him as a ruler new to powerbecause from being a weak king he has become the mostfamous and honoured of Christendom, and when you lookat his achievements you ﬁnd they are all remarkable and
some of them extraordinary. At the beginning of his reign he
launched an invasion of Granada, a campaign that laid the
foundation of his power. It was important that he did it at amoment of domestic quiet when he didn’t have to worryabout possible interruptions: the war then kept the Castilianbarons busy so that they didn’t start plotting changes inside
Spain. Meanwhile, and without their even noticing, Ferdi-
nand’s power and reputation were increasing at their expense.Supplying his armies with money from the Church and thepeople, he was able to sustain a long war that allowed him toestablish, then consolidate, a military force that would do
him proud in the future. After that was done, to ensure the
Church’s support for even larger campaigns, he perpetratedan act of cruelty dressed up as piety, stripping the MarranoJews of their wealth and expelling them from his kingdom, amove that could hardly have been more distressing or striking.Once again under cover of religion, he attacked Africa, thenmoved into Italy and ﬁnally attacked France. So he was always
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   86 28/05/2015   14:1486 the prince
control again. Circumstances were such at the time that no
foreign enemies were in a position to help the people. Later,however, her fortresses were not much use when CesareBorgia attacked the town, and the people, who were hostileto her, fought on his side. Both then and earlier she wouldhave been safer had she avoided making an enemy of thepeople rather than counting on fortresses. All things con-
sidered, I’ll give my approval both to rulers who build fort-
resses and to those who don’t, but I’ll always criticize any
ruler who imagines it doesn’t matter whether the people hatehim or not and trusts in fortresses for his security.21
What a ruler should do to win respect
Nothing wins a ruler respect like great military victories and
a display of remarkable personal qualities. One example in
our own times is Ferdinand of Aragon, the present King of
Spain. One might almost describe him as a ruler new to powerbecause from being a weak king he has become the mostfamous and honoured of Christendom, and when you lookat his achievements you ﬁnd they are all remarkable and
some of them extraordinary. At the beginning of his reign he
launched an invasion of Granada, a campaign that laid the
foundation of his power. It was important that he did it at amoment of domestic quiet when he didn’t have to worryabout possible interruptions: the war then kept the Castilianbarons busy so that they didn’t start plotting changes inside
Spain. Meanwhile, and without their even noticing, Ferdi-
nand’s power and reputation were increasing at their expense.Supplying his armies with money from the Church and thepeople, he was able to sustain a long war that allowed him toestablish, then consolidate, a military force that would do
him proud in the future. After that was done, to ensure the
Church’s support for even larger campaigns, he perpetratedan act of cruelty dressed up as piety, stripping the MarranoJews of their wealth and expelling them from his kingdom, amove that could hardly have been more distressing or striking.Once again under cover of religion, he attacked Africa, thenmoved into Italy and ﬁnally attacked France. So he was always
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   87 28/05/2015   14:1488 the prince
planning and doing great things, keeping his people in a state
of suspense and admiration, concentrated as they were on theoutcome of his various campaigns. Since each of these cameas a consequence of the one before, he never gave the morepowerful men in the country any slack time between warswhen they could plot against him.
A leader can also win acclaim by giving impressive demon-
strations of character in his handling of domestic affairs, asBernabo `Visconti did in Milan; whenever anyone does any-
thing remarkable, whether for good or ill, in civil life, youthink up some reward or punishment that will cause a stir.But above all a ruler must make sure that everything he
does gives people the impression that he is a great man of
remarkable abilities.
A ruler will also be respected when he is a genuine friend
and a genuine enemy, that is, when he declares himself unam-biguously for one side and against the other. This policy will
always bring better results than neutrality. For example, if
you have two powerful neighbours who go to war, you mayor may not have reason to fear the winner afterwards. Eitherway it will always be better to take sides and ﬁght hard. If
you do have cause to fear but stay neutral, you’ll still begobbled up by the winner to the amusement and satisfaction
of the loser; you’ll have no excuses, no defence and nowhere
to hide. Because a winner doesn’t want half-hearted friends
who don’t help him in a crisis; and the loser will have nothingto do with you since you didn’t choose to ﬁght alongside him
and share his fate.
When Antiochus was sent to Greece by the Aetolians to
push back the Romans, he sent ambassadors to the Achaeans,who were allied to the Romans, asking them to remain neu-tral, while for their part the Romans encouraged them to jointhe war on their side. The Achaean council debated the matterand after Antiochus’s ambassador had spoken, asking themto remain neutral, the Roman ambassador replied: ‘Withwhat a ruler should do to win respect 89
regard to this invitation to remain neutral, nothing could bemore damaging to your interests: you’ll get no thanks, noconsideration and will be taken as a reward by whoever wins.’
The contender who is not your ally will always try to get
you to stay neutral and your ally will always try to get you toﬁght. Indecisive rulers who want to avoid immediate dangerusually decide to stay neutral, and usually things end badly
for them. But if you declare yourself courageously for one
side or the other and your ally wins, he’ll be indebted to youand there’ll be a bond of friendship between you, so that evenif he is more powerful now and has you at his mercy he’s
not going to be so shameless as to take advantage of the
circumstances and become an example of ingratitude. Vic-
tories are never so decisive that the winner can override everyprinciple, justice in particular. But if your ally loses, you’restill his friend and he’ll offer what help he can: you becomecompanions in misfortune, and your luck could always turn.
In the event that the two neighbours going to war are not
so powerful that you need fear the winner, it is even moresensible to take sides and get involved: you’ll be destroyingone with the help of another who, if he had any sense, wouldbe protecting the loser. And when your ally wins, which withyour help is inevitable, he’ll be at your mercy.
Here it’s worth noting that a ruler must never ally himself
with someone more powerful in order to attack his enemies,unless, as I said above, it is absolutely necessary. Becausewhen you win you’ll be at your ally’s mercy, and whenever
possible rulers must avoid placing themselves in another’s
power. The Venetians allied themselves with France to attack
the Duke of Milan. It was an alliance they could have avoidedand it led to disaster. But when such an alliance can’t beavoided, as was the case with Florence when the pope andSpain took their armies to attack Lombardy, then a ruler musttake sides for the reasons set out above. In general, a rulermust never imagine that any decision he takes is safe; on the
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   88 28/05/2015   14:1488 the prince
planning and doing great things, keeping his people in a state
of suspense and admiration, concentrated as they were on theoutcome of his various campaigns. Since each of these cameas a consequence of the one before, he never gave the morepowerful men in the country any slack time between warswhen they could plot against him.
A leader can also win acclaim by giving impressive demon-
strations of character in his handling of domestic affairs, asBernabo `Visconti did in Milan; whenever anyone does any-
thing remarkable, whether for good or ill, in civil life, youthink up some reward or punishment that will cause a stir.But above all a ruler must make sure that everything he
does gives people the impression that he is a great man of
remarkable abilities.
A ruler will also be respected when he is a genuine friend
and a genuine enemy, that is, when he declares himself unam-biguously for one side and against the other. This policy will
always bring better results than neutrality. For example, if
you have two powerful neighbours who go to war, you mayor may not have reason to fear the winner afterwards. Eitherway it will always be better to take sides and ﬁght hard. If
you do have cause to fear but stay neutral, you’ll still be
gobbled up by the winner to the amusement and satisfaction
of the loser; you’ll have no excuses, no defence and nowhere
to hide. Because a winner doesn’t want half-hearted friendswho don’t help him in a crisis; and the loser will have nothingto do with you since you didn’t choose to ﬁght alongside him
and share his fate.
When Antiochus was sent to Greece by the Aetolians to
push back the Romans, he sent ambassadors to the Achaeans,who were allied to the Romans, asking them to remain neu-tral, while for their part the Romans encouraged them to jointhe war on their side. The Achaean council debated the matterand after Antiochus’s ambassador had spoken, asking themto remain neutral, the Roman ambassador replied: ‘Withwhat a ruler should do to win respect 89
regard to this invitation to remain neutral, nothing could be
more damaging to your interests: you’ll get no thanks, noconsideration and will be taken as a reward by whoever wins.’
The contender who is not your ally will always try to get
you to stay neutral and your ally will always try to get you toﬁght. Indecisive rulers who want to avoid immediate dangerusually decide to stay neutral, and usually things end badly
for them. But if you declare yourself courageously for one
side or the other and your ally wins, he’ll be indebted to youand there’ll be a bond of friendship between you, so that evenif he is more powerful now and has you at his mercy he’snot going to be so shameless as to take advantage of the
circumstances and become an example of ingratitude. Vic-
tories are never so decisive that the winner can override everyprinciple, justice in particular. But if your ally loses, you’re
still his friend and he’ll offer what help he can: you becomecompanions in misfortune, and your luck could always turn.
In the event that the two neighbours going to war are not
so powerful that you need fear the winner, it is even moresensible to take sides and get involved: you’ll be destroyingone with the help of another who, if he had any sense, wouldbe protecting the loser. And when your ally wins, which withyour help is inevitable, he’ll be at your mercy.
Here it’s worth noting that a ruler must never ally himself
with someone more powerful in order to attack his enemies,unless, as I said above, it is absolutely necessary. Becausewhen you win you’ll be at your ally’s mercy, and whenever
possible rulers must avoid placing themselves in another’s
power. The Venetians allied themselves with France to attack
the Duke of Milan. It was an alliance they could have avoidedand it led to disaster. But when such an alliance can’t be
avoided, as was the case with Florence when the pope andSpain took their armies to attack Lombardy, then a ruler musttake sides for the reasons set out above. In general, a rulermust never imagine that any decision he takes is safe; on the
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   89 28/05/2015   14:1490 the prince
contrary he should reckon that any decision is potentially
dangerous. It is in the nature of things that every time you tryto avoid one danger you run into another. Good sense consistsin being able to assess the dangers and choose the lesser ofvarious evils.
A ruler must also show that he admires achievement in
others, giving work to men of ability and rewarding people
who excel in this or that craft. What’s more, he should
reassure his subjects that they can go calmly about theirbusiness as merchants or farmers, or whatever other tradethey practise, without worrying that if they increase theirwealth they’ll be in danger of having it taken away from them,
or that if they start up a business they’ll be punitively taxed.
On the contrary, a ruler should offer incentives to people whowant to do this kind of thing and to whoever plans to bringprosperity to his city or state. Then at the right times of theyear he should entertain people with shows and festivals. And
since every city is divided into guilds and districts, he should
respect these groups and go to their meetings from time totime, showing what a humane and generous person he is,though without ever forgetting the authority of his position,something he must always keep to the fore.22
A ruler’s ministers
A ruler’s choice of ministers is an important matter. Thequality of the ministers will reﬂect his good sense or lack of
it and give people their ﬁrst impression of the way the ruler’s
mind is working. If his ministers are capable and loyal, people
will always reckon a ruler astute, because he was able torecognize their ability and command their loyalty. When theyare not, people will always have reason to criticize, becausetheﬁrst mistake the ruler made was in his choice of ministers.
Everyone who knew Antonio da Venafro, Pandolfo Petrucci’sminister in Siena, thought Pandolfo extremely smart forhaving chosen him.
There are actually three kinds of mind: one kind grasps
things unaided, the second sees what another has grasped,
the third grasps nothing and sees nothing. The ﬁrst kind is
extremely valuable, the second valuable, the third useless. So
although Pandolfo didn’t have the ﬁrst kind of mind, he cer-
tainly had the second; if someone is sharp enough to recognizewhat’s right and wrong in what another man says and does,
then even if he doesn’t have the creativity to make policy
himself, he can still see which of his minister’s policies are
positive and negative, encourage the good ones and correctthe bad. The minister, meanwhile, will realize that he can’tfool the ruler and so will have to behave.
There is one infallible way of checking a minister’s creden-
tials: when you see the man thinking more for himself than
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   90 28/05/2015   14:1490 the prince
contrary he should reckon that any decision is potentially
dangerous. It is in the nature of things that every time you tryto avoid one danger you run into another. Good sense consistsin being able to assess the dangers and choose the lesser ofvarious evils.
A ruler must also show that he admires achievement in
others, giving work to men of ability and rewarding people
who excel in this or that craft. What’s more, he should
reassure his subjects that they can go calmly about theirbusiness as merchants or farmers, or whatever other tradethey practise, without worrying that if they increase theirwealth they’ll be in danger of having it taken away from them,
or that if they start up a business they’ll be punitively taxed.
On the contrary, a ruler should offer incentives to people whowant to do this kind of thing and to whoever plans to bringprosperity to his city or state. Then at the right times of theyear he should entertain people with shows and festivals. And
since every city is divided into guilds and districts, he should
respect these groups and go to their meetings from time totime, showing what a humane and generous person he is,though without ever forgetting the authority of his position,something he must always keep to the fore.22
A ruler’s ministers
A ruler’s choice of ministers is an important matter. The
quality of the ministers will reﬂect his good sense or lack of
it and give people their ﬁrst impression of the way the ruler’s
mind is working. If his ministers are capable and loyal, people
will always reckon a ruler astute, because he was able torecognize their ability and command their loyalty. When theyare not, people will always have reason to criticize, becausetheﬁrst mistake the ruler made was in his choice of ministers.
Everyone who knew Antonio da Venafro, Pandolfo Petrucci’sminister in Siena, thought Pandolfo extremely smart forhaving chosen him.
There are actually three kinds of mind: one kind grasps
things unaided, the second sees what another has grasped,
the third grasps nothing and sees nothing. The ﬁrst kind is
extremely valuable, the second valuable, the third useless. So
although Pandolfo didn’t have the ﬁrst kind of mind, he cer-
tainly had the second; if someone is sharp enough to recognizewhat’s right and wrong in what another man says and does,
then even if he doesn’t have the creativity to make policy
himself, he can still see which of his minister’s policies are
positive and negative, encourage the good ones and correctthe bad. The minister, meanwhile, will realize that he can’tfool the ruler and so will have to behave.
There is one infallible way of checking a minister’s creden-
tials: when you see the man thinking more for himself than
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   91 28/05/2015   14:1492 the prince
for you, when his policies are all designed to enhance his own
interests, then he’ll never make a good minister and you’llnever be able to trust him. A minister running a state mustnever think of himself, only of the ruler, and should concen-trate exclusively on the ruler’s business. To make sure he doesso, the ruler, for his part, must take an interest in the minister,grant him wealth and respect, oblige him and share honours
and appointments with him. That way the minister will see
that he can’t survive without the ruler. He’ll have so manyhonours he won’t want any more, so much wealth he won’tlook for more, and so many appointments that he’ll guardagainst any change of the status quo. When rulers and their
ministers arrange their relationships this way, they can trust
each other. When they don’t, one or the other is bound to
come to a bad end.23
Avoiding ﬂatterers
There’s another important issue we need to consider, a mis-take rulers can only avoid if they are very canny, or very
good at choosing their ministers. I’m talking about ﬂatterers.
Courts are always full of them and men are so ready to
congratulate themselves on their achievements and to imaginethemselves more successful than they are that it is hard notto fall into this error. Then if you do try to defend yourselffrom ﬂatterers you run the risk of having people despise you.
Because the only way to guard against ﬂattery is to have
people understand that you don’t mind them telling you the
truth. But when anyone and everyone can tell you the truth,you lose respect.
So the sensible ruler must ﬁnd a middle way, choosing
intelligent men for ministers and giving them and only themthe right to tell him the truth, and only on the issues he asksabout, not in general. However, the ruler should ask hisministers about everything and listen to their opinions, thenmake up his mind on his own, following his own criteria. In
responding to these advisers, as a group or separately, he
should make it clear that the more openly they speak, themore welcome their advice will be. After which, he shouldn’ttake advice from anyone else, but get on with whatever hasbeen decided and be ﬁrm in his decisions. Try a different
approach and you’ll either be ruined by ﬂatterers or change
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   92 28/05/2015   14:1492 the prince
for you, when his policies are all designed to enhance his own
interests, then he’ll never make a good minister and you’llnever be able to trust him. A minister running a state mustnever think of himself, only of the ruler, and should concen-trate exclusively on the ruler’s business. To make sure he doesso, the ruler, for his part, must take an interest in the minister,grant him wealth and respect, oblige him and share honours
and appointments with him. That way the minister will see
that he can’t survive without the ruler. He’ll have so manyhonours he won’t want any more, so much wealth he won’t
look for more, and so many appointments that he’ll guardagainst any change of the status quo. When rulers and their
ministers arrange their relationships this way, they can trust
each other. When they don’t, one or the other is bound tocome to a bad end.23
Avoiding ﬂatterers
There’s another important issue we need to consider, a mis-
take rulers can only avoid if they are very canny, or very
good at choosing their ministers. I’m talking about ﬂatterers.
Courts are always full of them and men are so ready to
congratulate themselves on their achievements and to imaginethemselves more successful than they are that it is hard notto fall into this error. Then if you do try to defend yourselffrom ﬂatterers you run the risk of having people despise you.
Because the only way to guard against ﬂattery is to have
people understand that you don’t mind them telling you thetruth. But when anyone and everyone can tell you the truth,you lose respect.
So the sensible ruler must ﬁnd a middle way, choosing
intelligent men for ministers and giving them and only themthe right to tell him the truth, and only on the issues he asksabout, not in general. However, the ruler should ask hisministers about everything and listen to their opinions, thenmake up his mind on his own, following his own criteria. In
responding to these advisers, as a group or separately, he
should make it clear that the more openly they speak, themore welcome their advice will be. After which, he shouldn’t
take advice from anyone else, but get on with whatever hasbeen decided and be ﬁrm in his decisions. Try a different
approach and you’ll either be ruined by ﬂatterers or change
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   93 28/05/2015   14:1494 the prince
your mind so often listening to everyone’s opinions that
people will lose their respect for you.
Let me offer an example from modern times. Bishop Luca
Rainaldi, a man close to the present Emperor Maximilian,said that the emperor never took advice from anyone andnever got his own policies enacted; this is because he didthe opposite of what I proposed above. Being secretive, the
emperor tends not to explain his plans to anyone and doesn’t
seek advice. But when he starts putting his policies into actionand people see what he’s up to, his ministers tell him he’s gotit wrong and all too readily he changes his mind. As a result,whatever he does one day he undoes the next and nobody
understands what he wants or means to do and no one can
make plans in response to his policies.
So a ruler must always take advice, but only when he wants
it, not when others want to give it to him. In fact he shoulddiscourage people from giving him advice unasked. On the
other hand he should ask a great deal and listen patiently
when an adviser responds truthfully. And if he realizes some-one is keeping quiet out of fear, he should show his irritation.Many people think that when a ruler has a reputation forbeing sensible it’s thanks to the good advice he’s getting from
his ministers and not because he’s shrewd himself. But they’re
wrong. There’s a general and infallible rule here: that a leaderwho isn’t sensible himself can never get good advice, unlesshe just happens to have put the government entirely in thehands of a single minister who turns out to be extremelyshrewd. In this case he may well get good advice, but the
situation won’t last long because the minister will soon grab
the state for himself. If on the other hand he’s taking advicefrom more than one person, an ingenuous ruler will ﬁnd
himself listening to very different opinions and won’t knowhow to make sense of them. Each of his advisers will bethinking of his own interests and the ruler won’t be able to
control them or even sense what’s going on. It’s not a case ofavoiding flatterers 95
ﬁnding better ministers; men will always be out to trick youunless you force them to be honest. In conclusion: a ruler isn’tsmart because he’s getting proper advice; on the contrary, it’shis good sense that makes the right advice possible.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   94 28/05/2015   14:1494 the prince
your mind so often listening to everyone’s opinions that
people will lose their respect for you.
Let me offer an example from modern times. Bishop Luca
Rainaldi, a man close to the present Emperor Maximilian,said that the emperor never took advice from anyone andnever got his own policies enacted; this is because he didthe opposite of what I proposed above. Being secretive, the
emperor tends not to explain his plans to anyone and doesn’t
seek advice. But when he starts putting his policies into actionand people see what he’s up to, his ministers tell him he’s got
it wrong and all too readily he changes his mind. As a result,whatever he does one day he undoes the next and nobody
understands what he wants or means to do and no one can
make plans in response to his policies.
So a ruler must always take advice, but only when he wants
it, not when others want to give it to him. In fact he shoulddiscourage people from giving him advice unasked. On the
other hand he should ask a great deal and listen patiently
when an adviser responds truthfully. And if he realizes some-one is keeping quiet out of fear, he should show his irritation.Many people think that when a ruler has a reputation forbeing sensible it’s thanks to the good advice he’s getting fromhis ministers and not because he’s shrewd himself. But they’re
wrong. There’s a general and infallible rule here: that a leaderwho isn’t sensible himself can never get good advice, unlesshe just happens to have put the government entirely in thehands of a single minister who turns out to be extremelyshrewd. In this case he may well get good advice, but the
situation won’t last long because the minister will soon grab
the state for himself. If on the other hand he’s taking advicefrom more than one person, an ingenuous ruler will ﬁnd
himself listening to very different opinions and won’t knowhow to make sense of them. Each of his advisers will bethinking of his own interests and the ruler won’t be able to
control them or even sense what’s going on. It’s not a case ofavoiding flatterers 95
ﬁnding better ministers; men will always be out to trick you
unless you force them to be honest. In conclusion: a ruler isn’tsmart because he’s getting proper advice; on the contrary, it’shis good sense that makes the right advice possible.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   95 28/05/2015   14:1424
Why Italian rulers have lost their states
Followed carefully, the guidelines I’ve laid down will allow a
ruler who’s just taken over a state to assume the aura of a
hereditary king and give him even greater security and staying
power than if his government was well established. Peoplewatch what a new ruler does far more attentively than theydo a hereditary one and if his achievements are impressivethey’ll have a greater hold on people and command greaterloyalty than an old royal bloodline. Men are more interested
in the present than the past and when things are going well
they’ll be happy and won’t look elsewhere; on the contrary,they’ll do everything they can to defend a ruler so long as hedoesn’t let himself down in other ways. So he’ll enjoy the
double glory of having both founded a new kingdom and
graced and consolidated it with good laws, a good army, good
allies and good policies. Conversely, the man who’s born topower but behaves so stupidly as to lose it is shamed twiceover.
Turning now to those Italian rulers who’ve lost power in
recent years –the King of Naples, for example, and the Duke
of Milan and others too –theﬁrst thing we ﬁnd is that they
all had poor armies, this for the reasons I discussed at lengthabove. Then we see that some of them had the people againstthem, or if they did have the people’s support they couldn’tkeep the nobles on their side. Without these failings you don’t
lose a state that’s strong enough to ﬁeld an army. Philip ofwhy italian rulers have lost their states 97
Macedonia –not Alexander’s father but the Philip beaten by
Titus Quintius –had nothing like the resources of the Romans
and Greeks who attacked him: all the same, being a militaryman and a leader who knew how to please the people andkeep the nobles on his side, he held out for many years andthough in the end he did lose control of a few towns, at leasthe hung on to his kingdom.
So these rulers of ours, who were well-established kings
and dukes yet still lost their states, should spare us theirbad-luck stories; they have only themselves to blame. Inpeacetime they never imagined anything could change (it’sacommon shortcoming not to prepare for the storm while the
weather is fair) and when trouble struck their ﬁrst thought
was to run for it rather than defend themselves; they hoped
the people would be incensed by the barbarity of the invadersand call them back. This isn’t a bad policy when you have noalternative, but to trust in that reaction when you could have
taken other precautions is a serious failing; a ruler should
never be resigned to falling from power because he’s countingonﬁnding someone to prop him up again afterwards. Maybe
people won’t oblige, and even if they do, you won’t be safe,because your strategy was spineless and involved relying onothers. The only good, sure, lasting forms of defence are those
based on yourself and your own strength.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   96 28/05/2015   14:1424
Why Italian rulers have lost their states
Followed carefully, the guidelines I’ve laid down will allow a
ruler who’s just taken over a state to assume the aura of a
hereditary king and give him even greater security and staying
power than if his government was well established. Peoplewatch what a new ruler does far more attentively than theydo a hereditary one and if his achievements are impressivethey’ll have a greater hold on people and command greaterloyalty than an old royal bloodline. Men are more interested
in the present than the past and when things are going well
they’ll be happy and won’t look elsewhere; on the contrary,
they’ll do everything they can to defend a ruler so long as hedoesn’t let himself down in other ways. So he’ll enjoy the
double glory of having both founded a new kingdom and
graced and consolidated it with good laws, a good army, good
allies and good policies. Conversely, the man who’s born topower but behaves so stupidly as to lose it is shamed twiceover.
Turning now to those Italian rulers who’ve lost power in
recent years –the King of Naples, for example, and the Duke
of Milan and others too –theﬁrst thing we ﬁnd is that they
all had poor armies, this for the reasons I discussed at lengthabove. Then we see that some of them had the people againstthem, or if they did have the people’s support they couldn’tkeep the nobles on their side. Without these failings you don’t
lose a state that’s strong enough to ﬁeld an army. Philip ofwhy italian rulers have lost their states 97
Macedonia –not Alexander’s father but the Philip beaten by
Titus Quintius –had nothing like the resources of the Romans
and Greeks who attacked him: all the same, being a military
man and a leader who knew how to please the people andkeep the nobles on his side, he held out for many years andthough in the end he did lose control of a few towns, at leasthe hung on to his kingdom.
So these rulers of ours, who were well-established kings
and dukes yet still lost their states, should spare us theirbad-luck stories; they have only themselves to blame. Inpeacetime they never imagined anything could change (it’sacommon shortcoming not to prepare for the storm while the
weather is fair) and when trouble struck their ﬁrst thought
was to run for it rather than defend themselves; they hoped
the people would be incensed by the barbarity of the invadersand call them back. This isn’t a bad policy when you have noalternative, but to trust in that reaction when you could have
taken other precautions is a serious failing; a ruler should
never be resigned to falling from power because he’s countingonﬁnding someone to prop him up again afterwards. Maybe
people won’t oblige, and even if they do, you won’t be safe,because your strategy was spineless and involved relying onothers. The only good, sure, lasting forms of defence are those
based on yourself and your own strength.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   97 28/05/2015   14:1425
The role of luck in human affairs, and how
to defend against it
I realize that many people have believed and still do believe
that the world is run by God and by fortune and that however
shrewd men may be they can’t do anything about it and have
no way of protecting themselves. As a result they may decidethat it’s hardly worth making an effort and just leave eventsto chance. This attitude is more prevalent these days as aresult of the huge changes we’ve witnessed and are still wit-nessing every day, things that no one could have predicted.
Sometimes, thinking it over, I have leaned a bit that way
myself.
All the same, and so as not to give up on our free will, I
reckon it may be true that luck decides the half of what wedo, but it leaves the other half, more or less, to us. It’s like
one of those raging rivers that sometimes rise and ﬂood the
plain, tearing down trees and buildings, dragging soil from
one place and dumping it down in another. Everybody runsfor safety, no one can resist the rush, there’s no way you canstop it. Still, the fact that a river is like this doesn’t prevent us
from preparing for trouble when levels are low, buildingbanks and dykes, so that when the water rises the next timeit can be contained in a single channel and the rush of theriver in ﬂood is not so uncontrolled and destructive.
Fortune’s the same. It shows its power where no one has
taken steps to contain it, ﬂooding into places where it ﬁnds
neither banks nor dykes that can hold it back. And if youthe role of luck in human affairs 99
look at Italy, which has been both the scene of revolutionarychanges and the agent that set them in motion, you’ll see it’sa land that has neither banks nor dykes to protect it. Had thecountry been properly protected, like Germany, Spain andFrance, either the ﬂood wouldn’t have had such drastic effects
or it wouldn’t have happened at all.
I think that is all that need be said in general terms about
how to deal with the problem of luck.
Going into detail, though, we’ve all seen how a ruler may
be doing well one day and then lose power the next withoutany apparent change in his character or qualities. I believethis is mostly due to the attitude I mentioned above: that is,
the ruler trusts entirely to luck and collapses when it changes.
I’m also convinced that the successful ruler is the one whoadapts to changing times; while the leader who fails does sobecause his approach is out of step with circumstances.
All men want glory and wealth, but they set out to achieve
those goals in different ways. Some are cautious, others impul-sive; some use violence, others ﬁnesse; some are patient, others
quite the opposite. And all these different approaches can besuccessful. It’s also true that two men can both be cautiousbut with different results: one is successful and the other fails.Or again you see two men being equally successful but with
different approaches, one cautious, the other impulsive. This
depends entirely on whether their approach suits the circum-stances, which in turn is why, as I said, two men with differentapproaches may both succeed while, of two with the sameapproach, one may succeed and the other not.
This explains why people’s fortunes go up and down. If
someone is behaving cautiously and patiently and the timesand circumstances are such that the approach works, he’ll be
successful. But if times and circumstances change, everythinggoes wrong for him, because he hasn’t changed his approachto match. You won’t ﬁnd anyone shrewd enough to adapt his
character like this, in part because you can’t alter your natural
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   98 28/05/2015   14:1425
The role of luck in human affairs, and how
to defend against it
I realize that many people have believed and still do believe
that the world is run by God and by fortune and that however
shrewd men may be they can’t do anything about it and have
no way of protecting themselves. As a result they may decidethat it’s hardly worth making an effort and just leave eventsto chance. This attitude is more prevalent these days as aresult of the huge changes we’ve witnessed and are still wit-
nessing every day, things that no one could have predicted.
Sometimes, thinking it over, I have leaned a bit that way
myself.
All the same, and so as not to give up on our free will, I
reckon it may be true that luck decides the half of what wedo, but it leaves the other half, more or less, to us. It’s like
one of those raging rivers that sometimes rise and ﬂood the
plain, tearing down trees and buildings, dragging soil from
one place and dumping it down in another. Everybody runsfor safety, no one can resist the rush, there’s no way you can
stop it. Still, the fact that a river is like this doesn’t prevent us
from preparing for trouble when levels are low, building
banks and dykes, so that when the water rises the next timeit can be contained in a single channel and the rush of theriver in ﬂood is not so uncontrolled and destructive.
Fortune’s the same. It shows its power where no one has
taken steps to contain it, ﬂooding into places where it ﬁnds
neither banks nor dykes that can hold it back. And if youthe role of luck in human affairs 99
look at Italy, which has been both the scene of revolutionary
changes and the agent that set them in motion, you’ll see it’sa land that has neither banks nor dykes to protect it. Had thecountry been properly protected, like Germany, Spain andFrance, either the ﬂood wouldn’t have had such drastic effects
or it wouldn’t have happened at all.
I think that is all that need be said in general terms about
how to deal with the problem of luck.
Going into detail, though, we’ve all seen how a ruler may
be doing well one day and then lose power the next withoutany apparent change in his character or qualities. I believethis is mostly due to the attitude I mentioned above: that is,
the ruler trusts entirely to luck and collapses when it changes.
I’m also convinced that the successful ruler is the one whoadapts to changing times; while the leader who fails does sobecause his approach is out of step with circumstances.
All men want glory and wealth, but they set out to achieve
those goals in different ways. Some are cautious, others impul-sive; some use violence, others ﬁnesse; some are patient, others
quite the opposite. And all these different approaches can besuccessful. It’s also true that two men can both be cautiousbut with different results: one is successful and the other fails.Or again you see two men being equally successful but with
different approaches, one cautious, the other impulsive. This
depends entirely on whether their approach suits the circum-stances, which in turn is why, as I said, two men with differentapproaches may both succeed while, of two with the sameapproach, one may succeed and the other not.
This explains why people’s fortunes go up and down. If
someone is behaving cautiously and patiently and the timesand circumstances are such that the approach works, he’ll be
successful. But if times and circumstances change, everythinggoes wrong for him, because he hasn’t changed his approachto match. You won’t ﬁnd anyone shrewd enough to adapt his
character like this, in part because you can’t alter your natural
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   99 28/05/2015   14:14100 the prince
bias and in part because, if a person has always been successful
with a particular approach, he won’t easily be persuaded todrop it. So when the time comes for the cautious man to actimpulsively, he can’t, and he comes unstuck. If he did changepersonality in line with times and circumstances, his luckwould hold steady.
Pope Julius II always acted impulsively and lived in times
and circumstances so well suited to this approach that thingsalways went well for him. Think of his ﬁrst achievement,
taking Bologna while Giovanni Bentivoglio was still alive.The Venetians were against the idea, the King of Spain like-wise, and Julius was still negotiating the matter with the
French. All the same, and with his usual ferocity and impetu-
ousness, the pope set out and led the expedition himself. Thisput the Venetians and Spanish in a quandary and they wereunable to react, the Venetians out of fear and the Spanishbecause they hoped to recover the whole of the Kingdom of
Naples. Meanwhile, the King of France was brought on
board: he needed Rome as an ally to check the Venetians anddecided that once Julius had made his move he couldn’t denyhim armed support without too obviously slighting him.
With this impulsive decision, then, Julius achieved more
than any other pope with all the good sense in the world
would ever have achieved. Had he waited to have everything
arranged and negotiated before leaving Rome, as any otherpope would have done, the plan would never have worked.The King of France would have come up with endless excusesand the Venetians and Spanish with endless warnings. I don’t
want to go into Julius’s other campaigns, which were all of akind and all successful. His early death spared him the experi-ence of failure. Because if times had changed and circum-stances demanded caution, he would have been ﬁnished. The
man would never have changed his ways, because they werenatural to him.
To conclude then: fortune varies but men go on regardless.the role of luck in human affairs 101
When their approach suits the times they’re successful, andwhen it doesn’t they’re not. My opinion on the matter is this:it’s better to be impulsive than cautious; fortune is female andif you want to stay on top of her you have to slap and thrust.You ’ll see she’s more likely to yield that way than to men who
go about her coldly. And being a woman she likes her menyoung, because they’re not so cagey, they’re wilder and more
daring when they master her.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   100 28/05/2015   14:14100 the prince
bias and in part because, if a person has always been successful
with a particular approach, he won’t easily be persuaded todrop it. So when the time comes for the cautious man to actimpulsively, he can’t, and he comes unstuck. If he did changepersonality in line with times and circumstances, his luckwould hold steady.
Pope Julius II always acted impulsively and lived in times
and circumstances so well suited to this approach that thingsalways went well for him. Think of his ﬁrst achievement,
taking Bologna while Giovanni Bentivoglio was still alive.The Venetians were against the idea, the King of Spain like-wise, and Julius was still negotiating the matter with the
French. All the same, and with his usual ferocity and impetu-
ousness, the pope set out and led the expedition himself. Thisput the Venetians and Spanish in a quandary and they wereunable to react, the Venetians out of fear and the Spanishbecause they hoped to recover the whole of the Kingdom of
Naples. Meanwhile, the King of France was brought on
board: he needed Rome as an ally to check the Venetians anddecided that once Julius had made his move he couldn’t deny
him armed support without too obviously slighting him.
With this impulsive decision, then, Julius achieved more
than any other pope with all the good sense in the world
would ever have achieved. Had he waited to have everything
arranged and negotiated before leaving Rome, as any otherpope would have done, the plan would never have worked.The King of France would have come up with endless excusesand the Venetians and Spanish with endless warnings. I don’t
want to go into Julius’s other campaigns, which were all of a
kind and all successful. His early death spared him the experi-ence of failure. Because if times had changed and circum-stances demanded caution, he would have been ﬁnished. The
man would never have changed his ways, because they werenatural to him.
To conclude then: fortune varies but men go on regardless.the role of luck in human affairs 101
When their approach suits the times they’re successful, and
when it doesn’t they’re not. My opinion on the matter is this:it’s better to be impulsive than cautious; fortune is female andif you want to stay on top of her you have to slap and thrust.You ’ll see she’s more likely to yield that way than to men who
go about her coldly. And being a woman she likes her menyoung, because they’re not so cagey, they’re wilder and more
daring when they master her.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   101 28/05/2015   14:1426
An appeal to conquer Italy and free it from
foreign occupation
Going back over everything I’ve said, I’ve been asking myself
whether the time is right, in Italy now, for a new ruler;
whether there’s the sort of material available here that would
give a shrewd man with the right qualities the chance toimpose some form, winning honour for himself and doinggood to the people as a whole. And my impression is that alot of things are running the way of a new man, so many infact that I don’t know what time was ever more right than
the present. If, as I said earlier, Moses could only emerge after
the people of Israel had been enslaved in Egypt, Cyrus showhis great spirit after the Persians were crushed by the Medes,Theseus prove his excellence after the Athenians were defeatedand dispersed, so today, for us to witness the qualities of a great
Italian, the country had to be reduced to its present state:
more slave than the Jews, more crushed than the Persians,more divided than the Athenians, leaderless, lawless, beaten,plundered, broken and overrun, ruined in every way.
There was one man* who showed glimpses of greatness,
the kind of thing that made you think he was sent by Godfor the country’s redemption, but then at the height of hisachievements his luck turned. So now Italy lies, half-dead,waiting to see who will heal her wounds and put an end tothe devastation of Lombardy, the extortionate taxation of
* Presumably Borgia.an appeal to conquer italy and free it 103
Tuscany and Naples, who will clean up the sores that havefestered too long. You can see the country is praying God tosend someone to save her from the cruelty and barbarity ofthese foreigners. You can see she is ready and willing to marchbeneath a ﬂag, if only someone would raise one up.
What I can’t see is any family the country could put its faith
in right now if not your illustrious house,* blessed as it is with
ﬁne qualities and fortune, favoured by God and the Church –
actually running the Church, in fact –and hence well placed to
lead Italy to redemption. And if you keep in mind the lives and
achievements of the men I’ve written about, then the projectwon’t be too difﬁcult. It’s true they were rare men, remarkable
men, but nevertheless they were still men, and none of them
had a better opportunity than you have now. The things theydid had no greater justiﬁcation, nor were they any easier; Godwas no kinder to them than he has been to you. Justice is deﬁ-nitely on our side because ‘war is just when there’s no alterna-
tive and arms are sacred when they are your only hope.’ The
situation is more than favourable, and when circumstancesare favourable things can’t be too hard; all you have to do is
take the men I’ve proposed as your models. What’s more,God has shown us amazing, unprecedented signs: the seaparted; a cloud led the way for you; stone has gushed water;
manna has rained on us from heaven; everything has worked
together to make you great. The rest is up to you. God doesn’tlike doing everything himself, he doesn’t want to deprive usof our free will and our share of glory.
It’s no surprise if none of the Italians I’ve spoken about
have been able to do what I believe your family can do, oragain if all our recent wars and revolutions have given theimpression that the country has lost its capacity to ﬁght. This
is because the old states were badly organized and no oneknew how to improve things. Nothing brings more honour
* Machiavelli is addressing Lorenzo de’ Medici.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   102 28/05/2015   14:1426
An appeal to conquer Italy and free it from
foreign occupation
Going back over everything I’ve said, I’ve been asking myself
whether the time is right, in Italy now, for a new ruler;
whether there’s the sort of material available here that would
give a shrewd man with the right qualities the chance toimpose some form, winning honour for himself and doinggood to the people as a whole. And my impression is that alot of things are running the way of a new man, so many infact that I don’t know what time was ever more right than
the present. If, as I said earlier, Moses could only emerge after
the people of Israel had been enslaved in Egypt, Cyrus showhis great spirit after the Persians were crushed by the Medes,Theseus prove his excellence after the Athenians were defeatedand dispersed, so today, for us to witness the qualities of a great
Italian, the country had to be reduced to its present state:
more slave than the Jews, more crushed than the Persians,more divided than the Athenians, leaderless, lawless, beaten,plundered, broken and overrun, ruined in every way.
There was one man* who showed glimpses of greatness,
the kind of thing that made you think he was sent by Godfor the country’s redemption, but then at the height of hisachievements his luck turned. So now Italy lies, half-dead,waiting to see who will heal her wounds and put an end tothe devastation of Lombardy, the extortionate taxation of
* Presumably Borgia.an appeal to conquer italy and free it 103
Tuscany and Naples, who will clean up the sores that have
festered too long. You can see the country is praying God tosend someone to save her from the cruelty and barbarity ofthese foreigners. You can see she is ready and willing to marchbeneath a ﬂag, if only someone would raise one up.
What I can’t see is any family the country could put its faith
in right now if not your illustrious house,* blessed as it is with
ﬁne qualities and fortune, favoured by God and the Church –
actually running the Church, in fact –and hence well placed to
lead Italy to redemption. And if you keep in mind the lives and
achievements of the men I’ve written about, then the projectwon’t be too difﬁcult. It’s true they were rare men, remarkable
men, but nevertheless they were still men, and none of them
had a better opportunity than you have now. The things theydid had no greater justiﬁcation, nor were they any easier; Godwas no kinder to them than he has been to you. Justice is deﬁ-nitely on our side because ‘war is just when there’s no alterna-
tive and arms are sacred when they are your only hope.’ The
situation is more than favourable, and when circumstancesare favourable things can’t be too hard; all you have to do istake the men I’ve proposed as your models. What’s more,
God has shown us amazing, unprecedented signs: the seaparted; a cloud led the way for you; stone has gushed water;
manna has rained on us from heaven; everything has worked
together to make you great. The rest is up to you. God doesn’tlike doing everything himself, he doesn’t want to deprive usof our free will and our share of glory.
It’s no surprise if none of the Italians I’ve spoken about
have been able to do what I believe your family can do, oragain if all our recent wars and revolutions have given theimpression that the country has lost its capacity to ﬁght. This
is because the old states were badly organized and no oneknew how to improve things. Nothing brings more honour
* Machiavelli is addressing Lorenzo de’ Medici.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   103 28/05/2015   14:14104 the prince
to a new ruler than the new laws and institutions he intro-
duces. When they are well thought out and show vision theybring a ruler respect and admiration. Italy is hardly lackingin raw material for the man who wants to give form to it. Thelimbs are healthy and strong; all they need is a head to guidethem. Look how much stronger, defter and more skilfulItalians are than foreigners in duels or small skirmishes. But
when it comes to armies they can’t compete. Because they are
badly led. The capable men are ignored, the incapable areconvinced they are capable, and to date no one has had thetalent and luck to score the sort of success that would forcethe others to stand aside. That’s why in all these wars over
the past twenty years, whenever an army has been entirely
made up of Italians it has always failed miserably, as witnessﬁrst the battle of Taro, then those of Alessandria, Capua,Genova, Vaila `, Bologna and Mestre.
So if your illustrious family should choose to follow in the
steps of those excellent men who came to the rescue of theirpeoples, the ﬁrst thing that needs to be done, the real foun-
dation of any such achievement, is to establish an army ofyour own citizens. You can’t have more loyal, determined
and better soldiers than your own. And if each man takensingly is good, when they’re all together and ﬁnd themselves
led, fed and respected by their own ruler they’ll be even better.Founding an army like this is absolutely essential if weare to use Italian mettle to defend ourselves against foreignenemies.
It’s true that the Swiss and Spanish infantries are thought
to be formidable, but both have weak points that would allowa third force not only to face them but to feel conﬁdent ofbeating them. The Spanish can’t stand up to cavalry and theSwiss are in trouble when they run into infantry as determinedas themselves. That’s why, as we’ve seen and will see again,the Spanish can’t turn back a French cavalry attack and theSwiss collapse in front of a Spanish-style infantry. And thoughan appeal to conquer italy and free it 105
we haven’t had complete proof of this Swiss vulnerability, wegot a glimpse of it at the battle of Ravenna when the Spanishinfantry took on the Germans, who use the same tactics asthe Swiss. Relying on their agility and their small roundshields, the Spanish got under the German pikes, where, safethemselves, they could strike at will. At this point the Germanswere helpless and if the cavalry hadn’t turned up to push the
Spanish back they’d all have been killed. Knowing the weak
points of these two armies, then, it’s quite possible to train a
new army that could hold back a cavalry attack and wouldn’tbe unsettled by infantry combat: it’s a question of whatweapons you have and what new tactics you can invent. These
are the kinds of developments that enhance a new ruler’s
reputation and bring him great prestige.
It would be a big mistake, then, after all this time, to pass
up the chance of rescuing Italy. Words can’t express the loving
welcome such a saviour would get in all the towns that have
suffered from this torrent of foreign invaders: the thirst for
revenge, the unswerving trust, the devotion, the tears. Whatdoors would be closed to such a man? Who would refuse toobey him? What envy could stand in his way? What Italianwould not bow his knee? Everybody loathes this barbarousoccupation. So, may your noble house undertake this duty
with the spirit and hope that inspire just causes, so that our
country may be gloriﬁed under your banner, and under yourprotection Petrarch’s words be fulﬁlled:
Virtue against fury
Shall take up arms; and the ﬁght be short;
For ancient valourIs not dead in Italian hearts.*
*Virtu `contro a furore
Prendera `l’arme; e ﬁa el combatter corto;
Che´l’antico valore
Nelli italici cor non e `ancor morto.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   104 28/05/2015   14:14104 the prince
to a new ruler than the new laws and institutions he intro-
duces. When they are well thought out and show vision theybring a ruler respect and admiration. Italy is hardly lackingin raw material for the man who wants to give form to it. Thelimbs are healthy and strong; all they need is a head to guidethem. Look how much stronger, defter and more skilfulItalians are than foreigners in duels or small skirmishes. But
when it comes to armies they can’t compete. Because they are
badly led. The capable men are ignored, the incapable areconvinced they are capable, and to date no one has had thetalent and luck to score the sort of success that would forcethe others to stand aside. That’s why in all these wars over
the past twenty years, whenever an army has been entirelymade up of Italians it has always failed miserably, as witnessﬁrst the battle of Taro, then those of Alessandria, Capua,Genova, Vaila `, Bologna and Mestre.
So if your illustrious family should choose to follow in the
steps of those excellent men who came to the rescue of theirpeoples, the ﬁrst thing that needs to be done, the real foun-
dation of any such achievement, is to establish an army ofyour own citizens. You can’t have more loyal, determinedand better soldiers than your own. And if each man takensingly is good, when they’re all together and ﬁnd themselves
led, fed and respected by their own ruler they’ll be even better.Founding an army like this is absolutely essential if weare to use Italian mettle to defend ourselves against foreignenemies.
It’s true that the Swiss and Spanish infantries are thought
to be formidable, but both have weak points that would allowa third force not only to face them but to feel conﬁdent ofbeating them. The Spanish can’t stand up to cavalry and theSwiss are in trouble when they run into infantry as determinedas themselves. That’s why, as we’ve seen and will see again,the Spanish can’t turn back a French cavalry attack and theSwiss collapse in front of a Spanish-style infantry. And thoughan appeal to conquer italy and free it 105
we haven’t had complete proof of this Swiss vulnerability, we
got a glimpse of it at the battle of Ravenna when the Spanishinfantry took on the Germans, who use the same tactics asthe Swiss. Relying on their agility and their small roundshields, the Spanish got under the German pikes, where, safethemselves, they could strike at will. At this point the Germanswere helpless and if the cavalry hadn’t turned up to push the
Spanish back they’d all have been killed. Knowing the weak
points of these two armies, then, it’s quite possible to train anew army that could hold back a cavalry attack and wouldn’tbe unsettled by infantry combat: it’s a question of whatweapons you have and what new tactics you can invent. These
are the kinds of developments that enhance a new ruler’s
reputation and bring him great prestige.
It would be a big mistake, then, after all this time, to pass
up the chance of rescuing Italy. Words can’t express the loving
welcome such a saviour would get in all the towns that havesuffered from this torrent of foreign invaders: the thirst for
revenge, the unswerving trust, the devotion, the tears. Whatdoors would be closed to such a man? Who would refuse toobey him? What envy could stand in his way? What Italianwould not bow his knee? Everybody loathes this barbarousoccupation. So, may your noble house undertake this duty
with the spirit and hope that inspire just causes, so that our
country may be gloriﬁed under your banner, and under yourprotection Petrarch’s words be fulﬁlled:
Virtue against fury
Shall take up arms; and the ﬁght be short;
For ancient valourIs not dead in Italian hearts.*
*Virtu `contro a furore
Prendera `l’arme; e ﬁa el combatter corto;
Che´l’antico valore
Nelli italici cor non e `ancor morto.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   105 28/05/2015   14:14.
Glossary of Proper Names
Machiavelli would have expected his readers to be familiar with the
exploits of the men he mentions from contemporary and moderntimes, while they would not have known so much about some ofthe ﬁgures he cites from ancient history. In an attempt to put today’sreader in something of the same position, I have been more generouswith information on the ﬁgures from modern history, and less so
with those from Roman times and before.
achilles Greek hero in the Trojan War, son of the immortal
nymph Thetis and raised by Chiron the centaur.
acuto, giovanni Italianization of John Hawkwood (1320 –
94). Having served in the English army in France, in 1360
Hawkwood joined mercenary soldiers in Burgundy and later
commanded the so-called White Company ﬁghting for differentstates and factions in Italy. Constantly playing off his employersagainst their enemies, he built up considerable wealth. From 1390
on he commanded Florentine armies in their war against theViscontis of Milan.
agathocles (361 –289 bc ) Ruler of Syracuse (317 –289 bc )
and King of Sicily (304 –289 bc ). Seized power in Syracuse, exil-
ing and murdering thousands in the process. His formation of astrong army and domination of Sicily led to protracted conﬂictwith Carthage.
albinus Decimus Clodius Ceionius Septimius (c.150 –197).
Roman military commander in Britain who proclaimed himselfemperor on the murder of Pertinax in 193. Albinus initially allied
himself with Severus in Rome who had also proclaimed himself
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   106 28/05/2015   14:14.
Glossary of Proper Names
Machiavelli would have expected his readers to be familiar with the
exploits of the men he mentions from contemporary and moderntimes, while they would not have known so much about some ofthe ﬁgures he cites from ancient history. In an attempt to put today’sreader in something of the same position, I have been more generouswith information on the ﬁgures from modern history, and less so
with those from Roman times and before.
achilles Greek hero in the Trojan War, son of the immortal
nymph Thetis and raised by Chiron the centaur.
acuto, giovanni Italianization of John Hawkwood (1320 –
94). Having served in the English army in France, in 1360
Hawkwood joined mercenary soldiers in Burgundy and later
commanded the so-called White Company ﬁghting for differentstates and factions in Italy. Constantly playing off his employersagainst their enemies, he built up considerable wealth. From 1390
on he commanded Florentine armies in their war against theViscontis of Milan.
agathocles (361 –289 bc ) Ruler of Syracuse (317 –289 bc )
and King of Sicily (304 –289 bc ). Seized power in Syracuse, exil-
ing and murdering thousands in the process. His formation of astrong army and domination of Sicily led to protracted conﬂictwith Carthage.
albinus Decimus Clodius Ceionius Septimius (c.150 –197).
Roman military commander in Britain who proclaimed himselfemperor on the murder of Pertinax in 193. Albinus initially allied
himself with Severus in Rome who had also proclaimed himself
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   107 28/05/2015   14:14108 glossary of proper names
emperor, but the two fell out and in 197, having lost the Battle
of Lugdunum (modern Lyons), Albinus either killed himself or
was killed.
alexander Alexander the Great (356 –323 bc ), King of Mace-
donia (336 –323 bc ). He conquered Greece, Persia, and much of
Asia.
alexander Marcus Aurelius Alexander Severus (208 –235),
Roman emperor (222 –235). Adopted as his heir in 221 by the
emperor Heliogabalus, who was also his ﬁrst cousin, Alexander
was eventually murdered by his own soldiers.
alexander vi Rodrigo Borgia (1431 –1503). Born in Valencia
with the Spanish surname Borja, later Italianized to Borgia.Elected pope in 1492, Alexander openly recognized as many as
eight illegitimate children, all of whom he tried to place in highpositions. The most famous were Cesare Borgia and LucreziaBorgia. Involved in endless intrigues to extend his territories andincrease his wealth, Alexander was considered the most corruptand grasping of the Renaissance popes. Although frequentlyaccused of murder, usually by poison, there is no evidence thathis own sudden illness and death in 1503 were the result of
poisoning.
antiochus Antiochus the Great (c.241 –187 bc ), King of Syria
(223 –187 bc ). Spent most of his reign in military campaigns
rebuilding the state he had inherited and conquering much ofAsia Minor. In 192 bc he invaded Greece but was beaten by the
Romans and eventually lost Asia Minor to them as well.
antoninus caracalla seecaracalla.
ascanio Seesforza, cardinal.
baglioni The Baglioni family ruled Perugia, a town midway
between Florence and Rome, in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth
centuries.
bentivogli, giovanni (1438 –1508) Son of Annibale, ruler of
Bologna, who was murdered in 1445 when Giovanni was just a
child. After a long interregnum Giovanni eventually took hisfather’s place in 1462, but was forced to ﬂee when Pope Julius II
attacked the town in 1506.
bergamo, bartolomeo da Bartolomeo Colleone (c.1395 –
1475). Mercenary leader in the service of Venice and commanderglossary of proper names 109
of Venetian forces against Milan after Carmagnola was killed.Colleone was remarkable for not changing sides or seeking toplay one side off against another. He is celebrated in the famousColleone monument by Andrea Verocchio in Venice, which showsthe leader on his horse.
bernabo `Seevisconti.
borgia, cesare (c.1475 –1507) Illegitimate son of Cardinal
Rodrigo Borgia, later Pope Alexander VI, Cesare Borgia was
made Bishop of Pamplona at ﬁfteen and a cardinal at eighteen.
In1497 the murder of his elder brother Giovanni made him the
main beneﬁciary of his father’s plans for territorial expansion.
Cesare was suspected of Giovanni’s murder but nothing was
proved. In 1498 he negotiated with Louis XII in Paris on behalf
of his father; the king’s marriage was dissolved, allowing him tomarry the widow of Charles VIII, while Louis agreed to anaggressive military alliance with the pope to capture Naples.Cesare then became the ﬁrst person in history to resign his pos-
ition as cardinal, upon which Louis made him Duke of Valenti-nois, hence the nickname, Duke Valentino. The alliance withLouis was reinforced by Borgia’s marriage to Charlotte d’Albret,the king’s cousin, and Borgia was serving with Louis’s army when
it captured Milan in 1499. Prompted by his father and with
Louis’s military support, Borgia set out to conquer the Romagna,
taking the towns of Fano, Pesaro, Rimini, Cesena, Forlı `, Faenza
and Imola. In 1501 the pope declared him Duke of Romagna.
Borgia successfully commanded French troops at the siege of
Naples in 1501, returning to the Romagna to capture Urbino and
Camerino in 1502. In this period he appointed Leonardo da Vinci
as his military architect and engineer. Faced with a revolt bymercenary leaders in his service, he invited them to Senigallia tonegotiate and had them imprisoned and executed. The death ofhis father in 1503 eventually led to the loss of the Romagna,
imprisonment and exile to Spain, where Borgia died in the serviceof his brother-in-law King John III of Navarre.
borgia, rodrigo Seealexander vi.
borgia, valentino Duke Valentino. See borgia, cesare.
braccio Andrea Braccio da Montone (1368 –1424). Successful
mercenary commander who fought numerous campaigns both
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   108 28/05/2015   14:14108 glossary of proper names
emperor, but the two fell out and in 197, having lost the Battle
of Lugdunum (modern Lyons), Albinus either killed himself or
was killed.
alexander Alexander the Great (356 –323 bc ), King of Mace-
donia (336 –323 bc ). He conquered Greece, Persia, and much of
Asia.
alexander Marcus Aurelius Alexander Severus (208 –235),
Roman emperor (222 –235). Adopted as his heir in 221 by the
emperor Heliogabalus, who was also his ﬁrst cousin, Alexander
was eventually murdered by his own soldiers.
alexander vi Rodrigo Borgia (1431 –1503). Born in Valencia
with the Spanish surname Borja, later Italianized to Borgia.Elected pope in 1492, Alexander openly recognized as many as
eight illegitimate children, all of whom he tried to place in highpositions. The most famous were Cesare Borgia and LucreziaBorgia. Involved in endless intrigues to extend his territories andincrease his wealth, Alexander was considered the most corruptand grasping of the Renaissance popes. Although frequentlyaccused of murder, usually by poison, there is no evidence thathis own sudden illness and death in 1503 were the result of
poisoning.
antiochus Antiochus the Great (c.241 –187 bc ), King of Syria
(223 –187 bc ). Spent most of his reign in military campaigns
rebuilding the state he had inherited and conquering much ofAsia Minor. In 192 bc he invaded Greece but was beaten by the
Romans and eventually lost Asia Minor to them as well.
antoninus caracalla seecaracalla.
ascanio Seesforza, cardinal.
baglioni The Baglioni family ruled Perugia, a town midway
between Florence and Rome, in the ﬁfteenth and sixteenth
centuries.
bentivogli, giovanni (1438 –1508) Son of Annibale, ruler of
Bologna, who was murdered in 1445 when Giovanni was just a
child. After a long interregnum Giovanni eventually took hisfather’s place in 1462, but was forced to ﬂee when Pope Julius II
attacked the town in 1506.
bergamo, bartolomeo da Bartolomeo Colleone (c.1395 –
1475). Mercenary leader in the service of Venice and commanderglossary of proper names 109
of Venetian forces against Milan after Carmagnola was killed.
Colleone was remarkable for not changing sides or seeking toplay one side off against another. He is celebrated in the famousColleone monument by Andrea Verocchio in Venice, which showsthe leader on his horse.
bernabo `Seevisconti.
borgia, cesare (c.1475 –1507) Illegitimate son of Cardinal
Rodrigo Borgia, later Pope Alexander VI, Cesare Borgia was
made Bishop of Pamplona at ﬁfteen and a cardinal at eighteen.
In1497 the murder of his elder brother Giovanni made him the
main beneﬁciary of his father’s plans for territorial expansion.
Cesare was suspected of Giovanni’s murder but nothing was
proved. In 1498 he negotiated with Louis XII in Paris on behalf
of his father; the king’s marriage was dissolved, allowing him tomarry the widow of Charles VIII, while Louis agreed to anaggressive military alliance with the pope to capture Naples.Cesare then became the ﬁrst person in history to resign his pos-
ition as cardinal, upon which Louis made him Duke of Valenti-nois, hence the nickname, Duke Valentino. The alliance withLouis was reinforced by Borgia’s marriage to Charlotte d’Albret,
the king’s cousin, and Borgia was serving with Louis’s army whenit captured Milan in 1499. Prompted by his father and with
Louis’s military support, Borgia set out to conquer the Romagna,
taking the towns of Fano, Pesaro, Rimini, Cesena, Forlı `, Faenza
and Imola. In 1501 the pope declared him Duke of Romagna.
Borgia successfully commanded French troops at the siege of
Naples in 1501, returning to the Romagna to capture Urbino and
Camerino in 1502. In this period he appointed Leonardo da Vinci
as his military architect and engineer. Faced with a revolt bymercenary leaders in his service, he invited them to Senigallia tonegotiate and had them imprisoned and executed. The death ofhis father in 1503 eventually led to the loss of the Romagna,
imprisonment and exile to Spain, where Borgia died in the serviceof his brother-in-law King John III of Navarre.
borgia, rodrigo Seealexander vi.
borgia, valentino Duke Valentino. See borgia, cesare.
braccio Andrea Braccio da Montone (1368 –1424). Successful
mercenary commander who fought numerous campaigns both
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   109 28/05/2015   14:14110 glossary of proper names
for and against most of the major states in Italy, eventually
becoming ruler of Perugia.
caesar Julius Caesar (c.100 –44 bc ). After successful military
campaigns in Gaul and Britain, Julius Caesar made himself dic-tator, taking the ﬁrst step to transforming the Roman Republic
into the Roman Empire. He was assassinated by a group ofsenators including his former friend Marcus Junius Brutus.
canneschi A family that vied with the Bentivogli family for
power in Bologna. The Bentivoglis were supported by Venice and
Florence while the Canneschis were allied to the Viscontis, dukes
of Milan. In 1445, with Milanese support, Battista Canneschi,
head of the family, had Annibale Bentivogli murdered. The people
of Bologna, however, turned against the Canneschis and lynchedBattista, after which the rest of the family ﬂed.
caracalla Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Caracalla (188 –217),
Roman emperor (211 –217). On the death of his father, the
emperor Severus, Antoninus took power with his brother Geta,but soon had him murdered, together with all his supporters. Heextended Roman citizenship to all free citizens of the empire,keeping the support of the army by increasing soldiers’ pay.
Unpopular with the people, Antoninus was eventually murderedby a member of his own guard, perhaps on the instigation ofMacrinus, the next emperor.
carmagnola Francesco Bussone (c.1432 –82), Count of Car-
magnola, a small town near Turin. Carmagnola was a mercenaryleader hired ﬁrst by Duke Visconti of Milan, then later by the
Venetians to ﬁght Milan. Failing to follow up an initial victory at
the battle of Maclodio in 1427, Carmagnola was accused of
treachery, arrested and beheaded.
charles vii (1403 –61) King of France (1422 –61). Inspired by
Joan of Arc, Charles united France under one ruler, driving theEnglish from all their French possessions with the exception ofCalais. He built up a powerful standing army.
charles viii (1470 –98) King of France (1483 –98). Having
taken effective power in 1492 after the regency of his sister Anne
and encouraged by both the pope and Ludovico Sforza, Duke ofMilan, to assert his claim to the throne of Naples, Charles
assembled an army of 25,000 men and in 1494 marched intoglossary of proper names 111
Italy. Having subdued Naples’ ally, Florence, Charles took Naples
itself in 1495. At this point the other Italian powers, including
the pope and Duke Ludovico, turned against him and drove him
out of the peninsula.
colonna, cardinal Giovanni Colonna. Made a cardinal in
1480, Giovanni plotted with Charles VIII against Alexander VI.
colonna A powerful family in medieval and Renaissance Rome,
notorious for their long feud with the Orsini family. The Colonna
family produced one pope, Martin V (ruled 1417 –31), but were
later excommunicated and their estates conﬁscated by AlexanderVI. The feud between the families was ended by papal bull in
1511.
commodus Lucius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus (161 –193),
Roman emperor (180 –93). The son of Marcus Aurelius, Com-
modus rejected his father’s stoic asceticism, giving himself overto pleasure and amusement while allowing a series of favouritesto run the empire. Boastful about his physique, he regularly tookpart in naked gladiatorial combat. Eventually a conspiracyagainst him led to his being strangled by the wrestler Narcissus.
conio, alberigo da Alberigo da Barbiano (c.1348 –1409)
was originally from the Romagna but later became Count ofConio, a small town in the hills above the Italian Riviera. Hewas the ﬁrst mercenary commander to insist that his army (the
Company of St George) be made up exclusively of Italians, adevelopment that led to a reduction in the use of foreign mercen-aries. Alberigo fought for Milan against Florence, dying in battlein1409.
cyrus (c.576 –529 bc ) Founder of the Persian empire, which he
extended to include much of central and south-west Asia.
darius Last king of Persia (336 –331 bc ), Darius was repeatedly
defeated in battle by Alexander the Great and ﬁnally deposed and
murdered by one of his provincial governors.
david (c.1012 –972 bc ) The second King of Israel (after Saul,
his father). Famous for his legendary defeat of the Philistine giantGoliath, using only a sling and stones. As king, David built up anempire, capturing Jerusalem, which he made his capital, as wellas areas of modern Jordan and Syria.
epaminondas (418 –362 bc ) Theban statesman and militaryglossary of proper names 111
Italy. Having subdued Naples’ ally, Florence, Charles took Naples
itself in 1495. At this point the other Italian powers, including
the pope and Duke Ludovico, turned against him and drove him
out of the peninsula.
colonna, cardinal Giovanni Colonna. Made a cardinal in
1480, Giovanni plotted with Charles VIII against Alexander VI.
colonna A powerful family in medieval and Renaissance Rome,
notorious for their long feud with the Orsini family. The Colonna
family produced one pope, Martin V (ruled 1417 –31), but were
later excommunicated and their estates conﬁscated by AlexanderVI. The feud between the families was ended by papal bull in
1511.
commodus Lucius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus (161 –193),
Roman emperor (180 –93). The son of Marcus Aurelius, Com-
modus rejected his father’s stoic asceticism, giving himself overto pleasure and amusement while allowing a series of favouritesto run the empire. Boastful about his physique, he regularly tookpart in naked gladiatorial combat. Eventually a conspiracyagainst him led to his being strangled by the wrestler Narcissus.
conio, alberigo da Alberigo da Barbiano (c.1348 –1409)
was originally from the Romagna but later became Count ofConio, a small town in the hills above the Italian Riviera. Hewas the ﬁrst mercenary commander to insist that his army (the
Company of St George) be made up exclusively of Italians, adevelopment that led to a reduction in the use of foreign mercen-aries. Alberigo fought for Milan against Florence, dying in battlein1409.
cyrus (c.576 –529 bc ) Founder of the Persian empire, which he
extended to include much of central and south-west Asia.
darius Last king of Persia (336 –331 bc ), Darius was repeatedly
defeated in battle by Alexander the Great and ﬁnally deposed and
murdered by one of his provincial governors.
david (c.1012 –972 bc ) The second King of Israel (after Saul,
his father). Famous for his legendary defeat of the Philistine giantGoliath, using only a sling and stones. As king, David built up anempire, capturing Jerusalem, which he made his capital, as wellas areas of modern Jordan and Syria.
epaminondas (418 –362 bc ) Theban statesman and military
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   110 28/05/2015   14:14110 glossary of proper names
for and against most of the major states in Italy, eventually
becoming ruler of Perugia.
caesar Julius Caesar (c.100 –44 bc ). After successful military
campaigns in Gaul and Britain, Julius Caesar made himself dic-tator, taking the ﬁrst step to transforming the Roman Republic
into the Roman Empire. He was assassinated by a group ofsenators including his former friend Marcus Junius Brutus.
canneschi A family that vied with the Bentivogli family for
power in Bologna. The Bentivoglis were supported by Venice andFlorence while the Canneschis were allied to the Viscontis, dukesof Milan. In 1445, with Milanese support, Battista Canneschi,
head of the family, had Annibale Bentivogli murdered. The peopleof Bologna, however, turned against the Canneschis and lynchedBattista, after which the rest of the family ﬂed.
caracalla Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Caracalla (188 –217),
Roman emperor (211 –217). On the death of his father, the
emperor Severus, Antoninus took power with his brother Geta,but soon had him murdered, together with all his supporters. Heextended Roman citizenship to all free citizens of the empire,keeping the support of the army by increasing soldiers’ pay.
Unpopular with the people, Antoninus was eventually murderedby a member of his own guard, perhaps on the instigation ofMacrinus, the next emperor.
carmagnola Francesco Bussone (c.1432 –82), Count of Car-
magnola, a small town near Turin. Carmagnola was a mercenaryleader hired ﬁrst by Duke Visconti of Milan, then later by the
Venetians to ﬁght Milan. Failing to follow up an initial victory at
the battle of Maclodio in 1427, Carmagnola was accused of
treachery, arrested and beheaded.
charles vii (1403 –61) King of France (1422 –61). Inspired by
Joan of Arc, Charles united France under one ruler, driving theEnglish from all their French possessions with the exception ofCalais. He built up a powerful standing army.
charles viii (1470 –98) King of France (1483 –98). Having
taken effective power in 1492 after the regency of his sister Anne
and encouraged by both the pope and Ludovico Sforza, Duke ofMilan, to assert his claim to the throne of Naples, Charlesassembled an army of 25,000 men and in 1494 marched intoglossary of proper names 111
Italy. Having subdued Naples’ ally, Florence, Charles took Naples
itself in 1495. At this point the other Italian powers, including
the pope and Duke Ludovico, turned against him and drove him
out of the peninsula.
colonna, cardinal Giovanni Colonna. Made a cardinal in
1480, Giovanni plotted with Charles VIII against Alexander VI.
colonna A powerful family in medieval and Renaissance Rome,
notorious for their long feud with the Orsini family. The Colonnafamily produced one pope, Martin V (ruled 1417 –31), but were
later excommunicated and their estates conﬁscated by AlexanderVI. The feud between the families was ended by papal bull in1511.
commodus Lucius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus (161 –193),
Roman emperor (180 –93). The son of Marcus Aurelius, Com-
modus rejected his father’s stoic asceticism, giving himself overto pleasure and amusement while allowing a series of favouritesto run the empire. Boastful about his physique, he regularly tookpart in naked gladiatorial combat. Eventually a conspiracyagainst him led to his being strangled by the wrestler Narcissus.
conio, alberigo da Alberigo da Barbiano (c.1348 –1409)
was originally from the Romagna but later became Count ofConio, a small town in the hills above the Italian Riviera. Hewas the ﬁrst mercenary commander to insist that his army (the
Company of St George) be made up exclusively of Italians, adevelopment that led to a reduction in the use of foreign mercen-aries. Alberigo fought for Milan against Florence, dying in battlein1409.
cyrus (c.576 –529 bc ) Founder of the Persian empire, which he
extended to include much of central and south-west Asia.
darius Last king of Persia (336 –331 bc ), Darius was repeatedly
defeated in battle by Alexander the Great and ﬁnally deposed and
murdered by one of his provincial governors.
david (c.1012 –972 bc ) The second King of Israel (after Saul,
his father). Famous for his legendary defeat of the Philistine giantGoliath, using only a sling and stones. As king, David built up anempire, capturing Jerusalem, which he made his capital, as wellas areas of modern Jordan and Syria.
epaminondas (418 –362 bc ) Theban statesman and militarydavid (c. 1012–972 bc ) The second King of Israel (after Saul,  his 
father-in-law). Famous for his legendary defeat of the Philistine 
 giant Goliath, using only a sling and stones. As king, David built 
up an empire, capturing Jerusalem, which he made his capital, as 
well as areas of modern Jordan and Syria.glossary of proper names 111
Italy. Having subdued Naples’ ally, Florence, Charles took Naples
itself in 1495. At this point the other Italian powers, including
the pope and Duke Ludovico, turned against him and drove him
out of the peninsula.
colonna, cardinal Giovanni Colonna. Made a cardinal in
1480, Giovanni plotted with Charles VIII against Alexander VI.
colonna A powerful family in medieval and Renaissance Rome,
notorious for their long feud with the Orsini family. The Colonnafamily produced one pope, Martin V (ruled 1417 –31), but were
later excommunicated and their estates conﬁscated by AlexanderVI. The feud between the families was ended by papal bull in1511.
commodus Lucius Aurelius Commodus Antoninus (161 –193),
Roman emperor (180 –93). The son of Marcus Aurelius, Com-
modus rejected his father’s stoic asceticism, giving himself overto pleasure and amusement while allowing a series of favouritesto run the empire. Boastful about his physique, he regularly tookpart in naked gladiatorial combat. Eventually a conspiracyagainst him led to his being strangled by the wrestler Narcissus.
conio, alberigo da Alberigo da Barbiano (c.1348 –1409)
was originally from the Romagna but later became Count ofConio, a small town in the hills above the Italian Riviera. Hewas the ﬁrst mercenary commander to insist that his army (the
Company of St George) be made up exclusively of Italians, adevelopment that led to a reduction in the use of foreign mercen-aries. Alberigo fought for Milan against Florence, dying in battlein1409.
cyrus (c.576 –529 bc ) Founder of the Persian empire, which he
extended to include much of central and south-west Asia.
darius Last king of Persia (336 –331 bc ), Darius was repeatedly
defeated in battle by Alexander the Great and ﬁnally deposed and
murdered by one of his provincial governors.
david (c.1012 –972 bc ) The second King of Israel (after Saul,
his father). Famous for his legendary defeat of the Philistine giantGoliath, using only a sling and stones. As king, David built up anempire, capturing Jerusalem, which he made his capital, as wellas areas of modern Jordan and Syria.
epaminondas (418 –362 bc ) Theban statesman and military
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   111 6/1/15   10:10 AM112 glossary of proper names
commander, he ended Spartan pre-eminence in Greece, making
Thebes the dominant power.
fabius maximus (c.280 –203 bc ) Statesman and military com-
mander, ﬁve times consul and twice dictator of Rome. Famous
for his cautious delaying tactics against Hannibal in the SecondPunic War and his hostility towards Scipio.
ferdinand of aragon (1452 –1516) At age seventeen Ferdi-
nand married Isabella of Castile, then eighteen, thus taking a ﬁrst
step towards uniting Spain. He ruled Castile with his wife from
1474 and became King of Aragon in 1479. After a long campaign
to capture Granada, the last territory held by the Muslims in
Spain, Ferdinand was ﬁnally victorious in 1492. In the same year
he expelled the Jews from both Castile and Aragon. The secondhalf of his reign was spent countering French expansionism inItaly. From 1494 to1496 he aided Italian leaders in their battle
to drive Charles VIII of France out of Italy. In 1501 he signed an
agreement with Louis XII to split the Kingdom of Naples betweenthem, but later turned against France, capturing the whole of thekingdom by 1504. By the time of his death, Spain was the most
powerful country in Europe, a power enhanced when Ferdinandwas succeeded by his grandson, Charles of Austria, who was alsoHoly Roman Emperor.
ferrara, duke of Machiavelli is actually referring to two
dukes in a family that had ruled Ferrara for some four centuries.(1) Ercole d’Este (1431 –1505), duke from 1471 –1505. Educated
in Naples, Ercole married the daughter of King Ferrante of Naplesand became one of the great patrons of Renaissance art. In 1481,
in alliance with Ferrante, he fought against the Venetians and thepapacy, losing a considerable amount of territory. He remainedneutral in the so-called Italian War of 1494 –98, but after the
French took Milan in 1499 he asked for and was granted French
protection.
(2) Alfonso d’Este (1476 –34), duke from 1505 –34. Alfonso
married, ﬁrst, Anna Sforza, sister of Gian Galeazzo Sforza and,
later, Lucrezia Borgia, daughter of Pope Alexander VI. In 1508 he
joined the League of Cambrai, which sought to destroy Venetianpower and partition its territories. After Pope Julius II went over
to the Venetian side, Alfonso remained loyal to France, as a resultglossary of proper names 113
of which he was excommunicated and attacked by both Venice
and the papacy. He resisted successfully, partly thanks to Frenchhelp, and partly due to Ferrara’s superior cannons whose manu-facture was a matter of special concern and pride to the duke. In1526 –27Alfonso took part in the expedition of Charles V (Holy
Roman Emperor and King of Spain) which led to the sacking ofRome.
filippo, duke Seevisconti, filippo.
fogliani, giovanni A leading citizen of Fermo, Fogliani was
killed in 1501.
forli `,countess of Caterina Sforza (1463 –1509), an illegiti-
mate daughter of Galeazzo Sforza, Duke of Milan. She marriedGirolamo Riario, ofﬁcially the nephew but possibly the son ofPope Sixtus IV. Riario was Count of Forlı `and after his murder
in1488 Caterina took control of the town until it was captured
by Cesare Borgia in 1500. She is famous for having refused to
hand over the citadel of Forlı `to rebels despite their threatening
to kill her children, whom they held hostage. Exposing her gen-itals from the castle walls, she told them she was perfectly capableof producing more children.
gracchi, the The brothers Tiberius Gracchus and Gaius Sem-
pronius Gracchus were members of a prominent family in Romein the second century bc. Both became Tribunes of the Plebs and
both were murdered after attempting to limit the power of thenobles and introduce reforms in favour of the plebs.
guidobaldo, duke of urbino (1472 –1508) Guidobaldo
da Montefeltro succeeded his father as Duke of Urbino in 1482.
He fought as a military captain for Pope Alexander VI andCharles VIII of France, and later for Venice against Charles.Under attack from Cesare Borgia in 1497, he ﬂed the town,
returning when Borgia’s mercenaries proved disloyal. UnderGuidobaldo’s rule, the court of Urbino was among the mostreﬁned in Europe and is considered to have been the inspirationof Baldassare Castiglione’s Book of the Courtier, which discusses
the qualities of the perfect courtier.
hamilcar Hamilcar Barca (c.270 –228 bc ). Successful com-
mander of the Carthaginians in the First Punic War against
Roman forces in Sicily in 247 bc . Launched an invasion of
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   112 28/05/2015   14:14112 glossary of proper names
commander, he ended Spartan pre-eminence in Greece, making
Thebes the dominant power.
fabius maximus (c.280 –203 bc ) Statesman and military com-
mander, ﬁve times consul and twice dictator of Rome. Famous
for his cautious delaying tactics against Hannibal in the SecondPunic War and his hostility towards Scipio.
ferdinand of aragon (1452 –1516) At age seventeen Ferdi-
nand married Isabella of Castile, then eighteen, thus taking a ﬁrst
step towards uniting Spain. He ruled Castile with his wife from
1474 and became King of Aragon in 1479. After a long campaign
to capture Granada, the last territory held by the Muslims in
Spain, Ferdinand was ﬁnally victorious in 1492. In the same year
he expelled the Jews from both Castile and Aragon. The secondhalf of his reign was spent countering French expansionism inItaly. From 1494 to1496 he aided Italian leaders in their battle
to drive Charles VIII of France out of Italy. In 1501 he signed an
agreement with Louis XII to split the Kingdom of Naples betweenthem, but later turned against France, capturing the whole of thekingdom by 1504. By the time of his death, Spain was the most
powerful country in Europe, a power enhanced when Ferdinandwas succeeded by his grandson, Charles of Austria, who was alsoHoly Roman Emperor.
ferrara, duke of Machiavelli is actually referring to two
dukes in a family that had ruled Ferrara for some four centuries.(1) Ercole d’Este (1431 –1505), duke from 1471 –1505. Educated
in Naples, Ercole married the daughter of King Ferrante of Naplesand became one of the great patrons of Renaissance art. In 1481,
in alliance with Ferrante, he fought against the Venetians and thepapacy, losing a considerable amount of territory. He remainedneutral in the so-called Italian War of 1494 –98, but after the
French took Milan in 1499 he asked for and was granted French
protection.
(2) Alfonso d’Este (1476 –34), duke from 1505 –34. Alfonso
married, ﬁrst, Anna Sforza, sister of Gian Galeazzo Sforza and,
later, Lucrezia Borgia, daughter of Pope Alexander VI. In 1508 he
joined the League of Cambrai, which sought to destroy Venetianpower and partition its territories. After Pope Julius II went over
to the Venetian side, Alfonso remained loyal to France, as a resultglossary of proper names 113
of which he was excommunicated and attacked by both Venice
and the papacy. He resisted successfully, partly thanks to Frenchhelp, and partly due to Ferrara’s superior cannons whose manu-facture was a matter of special concern and pride to the duke. In1526 –27Alfonso took part in the expedition of Charles V (Holy
Roman Emperor and King of Spain) which led to the sacking ofRome.
filippo, duke Seevisconti, filippo.
fogliani, giovanni A leading citizen of Fermo, Fogliani was
killed in 1501.
forli `,countess of Caterina Sforza (1463 –1509), an illegiti-
mate daughter of Galeazzo Sforza, Duke of Milan. She marriedGirolamo Riario, ofﬁcially the nephew but possibly the son ofPope Sixtus IV. Riario was Count of Forlı `and after his murder
in1488 Caterina took control of the town until it was captured
by Cesare Borgia in 1500. She is famous for having refused to
hand over the citadel of Forlı `to rebels despite their threatening
to kill her children, whom they held hostage. Exposing her gen-itals from the castle walls, she told them she was perfectly capableof producing more children.
gracchi, the The brothers Tiberius Gracchus and Gaius Sem-
pronius Gracchus were members of a prominent family in Romein the second century bc. Both became Tribunes of the Plebs and
both were murdered after attempting to limit the power of thenobles and introduce reforms in favour of the plebs.
guidobaldo, duke of urbino (1472 –1508) Guidobaldo
da Montefeltro succeeded his father as Duke of Urbino in 1482.
He fought as a military captain for Pope Alexander VI andCharles VIII of France, and later for Venice against Charles.Under attack from Cesare Borgia in 1497, he ﬂed the town,
returning when Borgia’s mercenaries proved disloyal. UnderGuidobaldo’s rule, the court of Urbino was among the mostreﬁned in Europe and is considered to have been the inspirationof Baldassare Castiglione’s Book of the Courtier, which discusses
the qualities of the perfect courtier.
hamilcar Hamilcar Barca (c.270 –228 bc ). Successful com-
mander of the Carthaginians in the First Punic War against
Roman forces in Sicily in 247 bc . Launched an invasion of
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   113 28/05/2015   14:14114 glossary of proper names
Hispania in 236 bc and became virtual dictator of Carthage
before being killed in battle. Father of Hannibal.
hannibal (247 –182 bc ) Son of Hamilcar. Commander of
Carthaginian forces from 221 bc , he took an army, which in-
cluded war elephants, across the Iberian peninsula, over the
Pyrenees and Alps and down into northern Italy in what becameknown as the Second Punic War. Despite impressive victories hewas forced to return home when the Romans attacked Carthage,
and was defeated at the Battle of Zama (201 bc ) by Scipio Afri-
canus. He then served for many years as chief magistrate ofCarthage, introducing all kinds of reforms, before the Romans
forced him into exile. Eventually, to avoid falling into Romanhands, he killed himself by poisoning.
heliogabalus (c.203 –222) Romanemperor(218 –22).Grand-
son of the aunt of murdered emperor Caracalla, and priest in thecult of the sun deity El Gabal, Heliogabalus was proclaimedthe true successor to Caracalla, with some people claiming hewas Caracalla’s illegitimate son by a union between ﬁrst cousins.
Installed as emperor after the emperor Macrinus had beendefeated and executed, he attempted to revolutionize Romanreligious traditions and ﬂouted sexual taboos, marrying ﬁve times
before, aged eighteen, he was murdered and replaced by his cousinSeverus Alexander.
hiero of syracuse Hiero II, King of Syracuse (270 –215 bc ).
Illegitimate son of a nobleman and one-time general with Pyrrhus,Hiero became commander of Syracusan forces on the departureof Pyrrhus in 275 bc and was elected ruler of the town after
defeating the Mamertines (Mamertina was present-day Messina).After ﬁghting and losing a war with Roman forces, he made a
pact with Rome in 263 bc , which assured his kingdom’s security
in return for support for the Romans in their war with Carthage.Hiero was a relative of Archimedes, whose inventions, particu-larly in the military ﬁeld, he supported.
joanna, queen (1373 –1435) Joanna II ruled Naples from
1414 to1435. Childless herself, she allowed her court to be run
by her favourites and lovers, playing off the Anjou and Aragonfamilies by offering prominent members of each succession to
her throne. Conﬂict between the royal lines saw the two mostglossary of proper names 115
successful mercenary commanders of the period, Francesco Sforza
and Braccio da Montone, pitted against each other.
julian Marcus Didius Julianus (c.133 –193). Consul under Per-
tinax, Julian was proclaimed emperor by the Praetorian Guardafter they had murdered Pertinax. He reigned for only sixty-sixdays before he himself was murdered when Septimius Severus,who had refused to recognize his leadership, arrived in Rome.
julius ii Giuliano della Rovere (1443 –1513), Cardinal of San
Pietro ad Vincula, was made pope in 1503 after the twenty-six-
day reign of Pius III, who had been elected after the death of
Alexander VI. Julius had for many years been a ﬁerce rival of
Alexander and was unlikely to be supportive of his son Cesare
Borgia. He rapidly dismantled the Borgia family’s power and setabout ending the feud between the dominant Orsini and Colonnafamilies. Having thus secured his authority in Rome, he reassertedpapal territorial rights in the Romagna, attacking the Venetiansand taking Perugia and Bologna in 1506. This gave the papacy
unprecedented temporal power. In 1508 he formed the League
of Cambrai together with France, Spain and the Holy RomanEmpire to expel the Venetians from Romagna altogether. Butafter the Venetians were defeated at Agnadello (or Vaila `) in1509,
Julius feared French domination and joined forces with Venice todrive Louis XII out of Italy. Julius was hugely inﬂuential as a
patron of the arts. He had the foundation stone of St Peter’s
Basilica laid in 1506 and commissioned Michelangelo to paint
the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.
leo x Giovanni de’ Medici (1475 –1521). Made a cardinal at age
thirteen, Giovanni, son of Lorenzo de’ Medici, was elected pope
in1513, taking the name of Leo X. His papacy was memorable
for the sale of indulgences to pay for building work on St Peter’sBasilica, his determined promotion of his Medici relationsand his response to Martin Luther’s ninety-ﬁve theses againstindulgences. In 1513 he joined forces with the Venetians and
various foreign powers to expel the French from Italy, butlater allied himself with the French against the Holy RomanEmpire.
louis xi (1423 –83) King of France (1461 –83). Louis increased
the power of the king in relation to the barons and added
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   114 28/05/2015   14:14114 glossary of proper names
Hispania in 236 bc and became virtual dictator of Carthage
before being killed in battle. Father of Hannibal.
hannibal (247 –182 bc ) Son of Hamilcar. Commander of
Carthaginian forces from 221 bc , he took an army, which in-
cluded war elephants, across the Iberian peninsula, over the
Pyrenees and Alps and down into northern Italy in what becameknown as the Second Punic War. Despite impressive victories hewas forced to return home when the Romans attacked Carthage,
and was defeated at the Battle of Zama (201 bc ) by Scipio Afri-
canus. He then served for many years as chief magistrate ofCarthage, introducing all kinds of reforms, before the Romans
forced him into exile. Eventually, to avoid falling into Romanhands, he killed himself by poisoning.
heliogabalus (c.203 –222) Romanemperor(218 –22).Grand-
son of the aunt of murdered emperor Caracalla, and priest in thecult of the sun deity El Gabal, Heliogabalus was proclaimedthe true successor to Caracalla, with some people claiming hewas Caracalla’s illegitimate son by a union between ﬁrst cousins.
Installed as emperor after the emperor Macrinus had beendefeated and executed, he attempted to revolutionize Romanreligious traditions and ﬂouted sexual taboos, marrying ﬁve times
before, aged eighteen, he was murdered and replaced by his cousinSeverus Alexander.
hiero of syracuse Hiero II, King of Syracuse (270 –215 bc ).
Illegitimate son of a nobleman and one-time general with Pyrrhus,Hiero became commander of Syracusan forces on the departureof Pyrrhus in 275 bc and was elected ruler of the town after
defeating the Mamertines (Mamertina was present-day Messina).After ﬁghting and losing a war with Roman forces, he made a
pact with Rome in 263 bc , which assured his kingdom’s security
in return for support for the Romans in their war with Carthage.Hiero was a relative of Archimedes, whose inventions, particu-larly in the military ﬁeld, he supported.
joanna, queen (1373 –1435) Joanna II ruled Naples from
1414 to1435. Childless herself, she allowed her court to be run
by her favourites and lovers, playing off the Anjou and Aragonfamilies by offering prominent members of each succession to
her throne. Conﬂict between the royal lines saw the two mostglossary of proper names 115
successful mercenary commanders of the period, Francesco Sforza
and Braccio da Montone, pitted against each other.
julian Marcus Didius Julianus (c.133 –193). Consul under Per-
tinax, Julian was proclaimed emperor by the Praetorian Guardafter they had murdered Pertinax. He reigned for only sixty-sixdays before he himself was murdered when Septimius Severus,who had refused to recognize his leadership, arrived in Rome.
julius ii Giuliano della Rovere (1443 –1513), Cardinal of San
Pietro ad Vincula, was made pope in 1503 after the twenty-six-
day reign of Pius III, who had been elected after the death of
Alexander VI. Julius had for many years been a ﬁerce rival of
Alexander and was unlikely to be supportive of his son Cesare
Borgia. He rapidly dismantled the Borgia family’s power and setabout ending the feud between the dominant Orsini and Colonnafamilies. Having thus secured his authority in Rome, he reassertedpapal territorial rights in the Romagna, attacking the Venetiansand taking Perugia and Bologna in 1506. This gave the papacy
unprecedented temporal power. In 1508 he formed the League
of Cambrai together with France, Spain and the Holy RomanEmpire to expel the Venetians from Romagna altogether. Butafter the Venetians were defeated at Agnadello (or Vaila `) in1509,
Julius feared French domination and joined forces with Venice todrive Louis XII out of Italy. Julius was hugely inﬂuential as a
patron of the arts. He had the foundation stone of St Peter’s
Basilica laid in 1506 and commissioned Michelangelo to paint
the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.
leo x Giovanni de’ Medici (1475 –1521). Made a cardinal at age
thirteen, Giovanni, son of Lorenzo de’ Medici, was elected pope
in1513, taking the name of Leo X. His papacy was memorable
for the sale of indulgences to pay for building work on St Peter’sBasilica, his determined promotion of his Medici relationsand his response to Martin Luther’s ninety-ﬁve theses againstindulgences. In 1513 he joined forces with the Venetians and
various foreign powers to expel the French from Italy, butlater allied himself with the French against the Holy RomanEmpire.
louis xi (1423 –83) King of France (1461 –83). Louis increased
the power of the king in relation to the barons and added
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   115 28/05/2015   14:14116 glossary of proper names
Burgundy and Anjou to the French throne. In a treaty of 1474 he
gained the right to levy troops in Switzerland.
louis xii (1462 –1515) King of France (1498 –1515). Louis was
the king who got France most determinedly involved in the affairs
of Italy. Originally Duke of Orleans, he succeeded his cousinCharles VIII in 1498 and quickly made a deal with Pope Alex-
ander VI that allowed him to renounce his ﬁrst wife and marry
Charles’s widow, thus adding Brittany to the French crown. Since
the house of Orleans had claims to both Milan and Naples, Louis
made an agreement with Venice to split Milan’s territory and
took the town in 1499. Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, took it
back in 1500 but was driven out again. Louis then used the same
policy in the south, reaching an agreement with Spain to divide
the Kingdom of Naples and taking the town for France in 1501.
However, the occupying powers fell out over the terms of thepartition and in 1503 the Spanish defeated the French at Gari-
gliano. In 1508 Louis joined the Holy Roman Empire, England,
the Papal States, Florence and Spain in the so-called League ofCambrai, an aggressive alliance against the Venetians. Louis ledthe alliance’s army and scored a comprehensive victory over theVenetians at Agnadello (or Vaila `) in1509. But the consequent
increase in the power of both Rome and France caused the twopowers to fall out and in 1510 Pope Julius II, together with
England, Spain, Switzerland and the Holy Roman Empire, formedthe Holy League to drive France out of Italy, a goal that wasﬁnally achieved at the battle of Novara in 1513. Two years later,
however, Louis’s successor, Francis I, would return to take Milanand much of northern Italy.
luca rainaldi, bishop An ambassador for the Emperor
Maximilian.
ludovico ii Also known as Ludovico il Moro. See sforza,
ludovico.
macrinus Marcus Opellius Macrinus (c.165 –218). Roman
emperor (217 –18). Macrinus was the ﬁrst emperor not to have
been a senator or a member of a senatorial family. He rose fromhumble origins to bureaucratic service under Severus and wasthen appointed prefect by Caracalla and proclaimed emperor
after Caracalla was murdered (many believed that Macrinus him-glossary of proper names 117
self was responsible for the murder). His brief reign was spent
entirely in the east, where military setbacks eroded his power-baseuntil eventually he was defeated by supporters of the fourteen-year-old Heliogabalus, grandson of Caracalla’s aunt, Julia Maesa.
mantua, marquis of Francesco Gonzaga (1466 –1519). Vic-
torious mercenary commander of the forces of the League ofVenice against Charles VIII of France at the battle of Fornovo in1495.
marcus aurelius Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (121 –180),
Roman emperor (161 –180). A Stoic philosopher, his work Medi-
tations, written in Greek while campaigning with his army, isstill considered a masterpiece. A successful reformer in domesticpolicy, he faced serious military threats from Parthia and fromvarious tribes in Germany and Gaul. He died of natural causesand was immediately deiﬁed.
maximilian (1459 –1519) Habsburg ruler of the Holy Roman
Empire (1486 –1519). Maximilian aimed to unify the empire’s
heterogeneous possessions by centralizing the administration. Healso hoped to recover the empire’s dominant position in Italy andto become leader of the Christian world by launching a crusadeagainst Islam. While his domestic reforms enjoyed a certainamount of success, his foreign policies were confused and ineffect-ive and led to the loss of Switzerland, which became an indepen-
dent confederation in 1499. Although Maximilian hoped to
regain territory from Venice, he was constantly thwarted by the
need to give precedence to countering French expansionism inthe peninsula. In 1495 he joined the League of Venice, which
aimed to expel the French from Italy, but gained nothing fromparticipation. In 1496 he was invited by the Duke of Milan (his
wife’s uncle) to send an army to meet the threat of a Frenchinvasion, but France did not attack. Persuaded to move south tohelp Pisa resist the Florentines, the imperial army surprisinglyfailed to save the town. In 1507 he began a long-drawn-out
attempt to take territory from Venice, but without making sig-niﬁcant progress. In 1512 Maximilian joined the Holy League to
push the French out of Italy. When Francis I once again tookMilan for the French in 1515, Maximilian became involved in
yet another, this time unsuccessful, attempt to keep France north
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   116 28/05/2015   14:14116 glossary of proper names
Burgundy and Anjou to the French throne. In a treaty of 1474 he
gained the right to levy troops in Switzerland.
louis xii (1462 –1515) King of France (1498 –1515). Louis was
the king who got France most determinedly involved in the affairs
of Italy. Originally Duke of Orleans, he succeeded his cousinCharles VIII in 1498 and quickly made a deal with Pope Alex-
ander VI that allowed him to renounce his ﬁrst wife and marry
Charles’s widow, thus adding Brittany to the French crown. Since
the house of Orleans had claims to both Milan and Naples, Louis
made an agreement with Venice to split Milan’s territory and
took the town in 1499. Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan, took it
back in 1500 but was driven out again. Louis then used the same
policy in the south, reaching an agreement with Spain to divide
the Kingdom of Naples and taking the town for France in 1501.
However, the occupying powers fell out over the terms of thepartition and in 1503 the Spanish defeated the French at Gari-
gliano. In 1508 Louis joined the Holy Roman Empire, England,
the Papal States, Florence and Spain in the so-called League ofCambrai, an aggressive alliance against the Venetians. Louis ledthe alliance’s army and scored a comprehensive victory over theVenetians at Agnadello (or Vaila `) in1509. But the consequent
increase in the power of both Rome and France caused the twopowers to fall out and in 1510 Pope Julius II, together with
England, Spain, Switzerland and the Holy Roman Empire, formedthe Holy League to drive France out of Italy, a goal that wasﬁnally achieved at the battle of Novara in 1513. Two years later,
however, Louis’s successor, Francis I, would return to take Milanand much of northern Italy.
luca rainaldi, bishop An ambassador for the Emperor
Maximilian.
ludovico ii Also known as Ludovico il Moro. See sforza,
ludovico.
macrinus Marcus Opellius Macrinus (c.165 –218). Roman
emperor (217 –18). Macrinus was the ﬁrst emperor not to have
been a senator or a member of a senatorial family. He rose fromhumble origins to bureaucratic service under Severus and wasthen appointed prefect by Caracalla and proclaimed emperor
after Caracalla was murdered (many believed that Macrinus him-glossary of proper names 117
self was responsible for the murder). His brief reign was spent
entirely in the east, where military setbacks eroded his power-baseuntil eventually he was defeated by supporters of the fourteen-year-old Heliogabalus, grandson of Caracalla’s aunt, Julia Maesa.
mantua, marquis of Francesco Gonzaga (1466 –1519). Vic-
torious mercenary commander of the forces of the League ofVenice against Charles VIII of France at the battle of Fornovo in1495.
marcus aurelius Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (121 –180),
Roman emperor (161 –180). A Stoic philosopher, his work Medi-
tations, written in Greek while campaigning with his army, isstill considered a masterpiece. A successful reformer in domesticpolicy, he faced serious military threats from Parthia and fromvarious tribes in Germany and Gaul. He died of natural causesand was immediately deiﬁed.
maximilian (1459 –1519) Habsburg ruler of the Holy Roman
Empire (1486 –1519). Maximilian aimed to unify the empire’s
heterogeneous possessions by centralizing the administration. Healso hoped to recover the empire’s dominant position in Italy andto become leader of the Christian world by launching a crusadeagainst Islam. While his domestic reforms enjoyed a certainamount of success, his foreign policies were confused and ineffect-ive and led to the loss of Switzerland, which became an indepen-
dent confederation in 1499. Although Maximilian hoped to
regain territory from Venice, he was constantly thwarted by the
need to give precedence to countering French expansionism inthe peninsula. In 1495 he joined the League of Venice, which
aimed to expel the French from Italy, but gained nothing fromparticipation. In 1496 he was invited by the Duke of Milan (his
wife’s uncle) to send an army to meet the threat of a Frenchinvasion, but France did not attack. Persuaded to move south tohelp Pisa resist the Florentines, the imperial army surprisinglyfailed to save the town. In 1507 he began a long-drawn-out
attempt to take territory from Venice, but without making sig-niﬁcant progress. In 1512 Maximilian joined the Holy League to
push the French out of Italy. When Francis I once again tookMilan for the French in 1515, Maximilian became involved in
yet another, this time unsuccessful, attempt to keep France north
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   117 28/05/2015   14:14118 glossary of proper names
of the Alps. Maximilian was succeeded by his grandson Charles V,
who became King of Spain as well.
maximinus Gaius Julius Verus Maximinus (c.173 –238),
Roman emperor (235 –238). Born in Thrace and from a humble
background, Maximinus rose to become a seasoned military com-mander and led an army rebellion against the young emperorAlexander Severus, who was abandoned by his own troops andmurdered. Hated by the aristocratic Senate, Maximinus faced
numerous rebellions and conspiracies, which he ruthlessly sup-
pressed, until he was eventually murdered by his own troops.
moses Old Testament Hebrew leader who led the Jews out of
their captivity in Egypt to ‘the promised land’.
nabis Ruler of Sparta (207 –192 bc ), ruthless in his determin-
ation to return Sparta to its former glory. After a period of
successful territorial expansionism, Nabis was attacked by theRomans in alliance with his other enemies. Decisively beaten byPhilopoemen, he nevertheless managed to hold on to the city ofSparta before being murdered by a group of Aetolians who weresupposedly coming to his aid.
niger, gaius pescennius (c.140 –194) Roman governor of
Syria, who proclaimed himself emperor after the murder of Perti-nax in 193, and was defeated and killed by the forces of Septimius
Severus in 194.
oliverotto Oliverotto Euffreducci (c.1475 –1502). Mercen-
ary commander who took power in Fermo in 1502 and used
ruthless force to eliminate his enemies. Oliverotto was killed byBorgia at Senigallia in 1502.
orco, remirro de Ramiro de Lorqua (c.1452 –1502). Mili-
tary commander in the service of Cesare Borgia. After beinginvolved in many military campaigns on Borgia’s behalf, he was
given the governorship of the Romagna in 1501. Arrested on
corruption charges, he was beheaded in 1502.
orsini One of the two powerful Roman families (the other was
the Colonna) whose feuding dominated political life in Romefrom the second half of the thirteenth century to the end of theﬁfteenth. Both families had mercenary armies. Cesare Borgia usedthe Orsini army in his early campaigns but broke with them when
he suspected them of conspiring against him. He later invited theglossary of proper names 119
Orsini leaders to Senigallia with the pretence of negotiating an
agreement and had them killed.
niccolo `orsini Count of Pitigliano (1442 –1510). Mercenary
commander who led Venetian forces in their war against theLeague of Cambrai, and joint commander with his cousin Bar-tolomeo d’Alviano at the battle of Agnadello (or Vaila `) at which,
largely thanks to disagreements between the two, the Venetianswere routed.
paulo, signor Paulo Orsini was leader of the Orsini faction
during the period of Cesare Borgia’s rise to power. He accepted
the invitation to negotiate at Senigallia, where Borgia had himstrangled on arrival.
pertinax Publius Helvius Pertinax (126 –193) was Roman
emperor for three months in 193. Proclaimed emperor after the
assassination of Commodus, Pertinax failed to give the army theﬁnancial rewards they expected, while his attempts to imposediscipline antagonized them. He was murdered when 300mutin-
ous soldiers of the Praetorian Guard stormed his palace.
petrarch FrancescoPetrarca(1304 –74).Scholar,poetandearly
Humanist whose work on the sonnet form was to be hugely inﬂu-ential in European poetry for centuries to come. The lines Machia-velli quotes at the conclusion of The Prince are taken from poem
XVI of Il canzoniere, in which Petrarch appeals to Italian leaders
to stop using foreign mercenaries to ﬁght Italian civil wars.
petrucci, pandolfo (1452 –1512) A powerful ﬁgure in Siena
from 1487 when the faction he belonged to toppled its opponents
in a coup. From 1502 he became ruler of the town, though
always ofﬁcially maintaining republican institutions. In his role
as ambassador of Florence, Machiavelli negotiated with him onseveral occasions.
philip of macedonia Machiavelli actually refers to two
Philips.
(1) Philip II (382 –336 bc ) King of Macedonia (359 –336 bc ),
father of Alexander the Great. Coming to power after the deathof his older brothers, Philip II rebuilt the Kingdom of Macedoniawith a series of wars and astute treaties. He was murdered by oneof his bodyguards.
(2) Philip V (238 –178 bc ) King of Macedonia (220 –178 bc ).
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   118 28/05/2015   14:14118 glossary of proper names
of the Alps. Maximilian was succeeded by his grandson Charles V,
who became King of Spain as well.
maximinus Gaius Julius Verus Maximinus (c.173 –238),
Roman emperor (235 –238). Born in Thrace and from a humble
background, Maximinus rose to become a seasoned military com-mander and led an army rebellion against the young emperorAlexander Severus, who was abandoned by his own troops andmurdered. Hated by the aristocratic Senate, Maximinus faced
numerous rebellions and conspiracies, which he ruthlessly sup-
pressed, until he was eventually murdered by his own troops.
moses Old Testament Hebrew leader who led the Jews out of
their captivity in Egypt to ‘the promised land’.
nabis Ruler of Sparta (207 –192 bc ), ruthless in his determin-
ation to return Sparta to its former glory. After a period of
successful territorial expansionism, Nabis was attacked by theRomans in alliance with his other enemies. Decisively beaten byPhilopoemen, he nevertheless managed to hold on to the city ofSparta before being murdered by a group of Aetolians who weresupposedly coming to his aid.
niger, gaius pescennius (c.140 –194) Roman governor of
Syria, who proclaimed himself emperor after the murder of Perti-nax in 193, and was defeated and killed by the forces of Septimius
Severus in 194.
oliverotto Oliverotto Euffreducci (c.1475 –1502). Mercen-
ary commander who took power in Fermo in 1502 and used
ruthless force to eliminate his enemies. Oliverotto was killed byBorgia at Senigallia in 1502.
orco, remirro de Ramiro de Lorqua (c.1452 –1502). Mili-
tary commander in the service of Cesare Borgia. After beinginvolved in many military campaigns on Borgia’s behalf, he was
given the governorship of the Romagna in 1501. Arrested on
corruption charges, he was beheaded in 1502.
orsini One of the two powerful Roman families (the other was
the Colonna) whose feuding dominated political life in Romefrom the second half of the thirteenth century to the end of theﬁfteenth. Both families had mercenary armies. Cesare Borgia usedthe Orsini army in his early campaigns but broke with them when
he suspected them of conspiring against him. He later invited theglossary of proper names 119
Orsini leaders to Senigallia with the pretence of negotiating an
agreement and had them killed.
niccolo `orsini Count of Pitigliano (1442 –1510). Mercenary
commander who led Venetian forces in their war against theLeague of Cambrai, and joint commander with his cousin Bar-tolomeo d’Alviano at the battle of Agnadello (or Vaila `) at which,
largely thanks to disagreements between the two, the Venetianswere routed.
paulo, signor Paulo Orsini was leader of the Orsini faction
during the period of Cesare Borgia’s rise to power. He accepted
the invitation to negotiate at Senigallia, where Borgia had him
strangled on arrival.
pertinax Publius Helvius Pertinax (126 –193) was Roman
emperor for three months in 193. Proclaimed emperor after the
assassination of Commodus, Pertinax failed to give the army theﬁnancial rewards they expected, while his attempts to imposediscipline antagonized them. He was murdered when 300mutin-
ous soldiers of the Praetorian Guard stormed his palace.
petrarch FrancescoPetrarca(1304 –74).Scholar,poetandearly
Humanist whose work on the sonnet form was to be hugely inﬂu-ential in European poetry for centuries to come. The lines Machia-velli quotes at the conclusion of The Prince are taken from poem
XVI of Il canzoniere, in which Petrarch appeals to Italian leaders
to stop using foreign mercenaries to ﬁght Italian civil wars.
petrucci, pandolfo (1452 –1512) A powerful ﬁgure in Siena
from 1487 when the faction he belonged to toppled its opponents
in a coup. From 1502 he became ruler of the town, though
always ofﬁcially maintaining republican institutions. In his role
as ambassador of Florence, Machiavelli negotiated with him onseveral occasions.
philip of macedonia Machiavelli actually refers to two
Philips.
(1) Philip II (382 –336 bc ) King of Macedonia (359 –336 bc ),
father of Alexander the Great. Coming to power after the deathof his older brothers, Philip II rebuilt the Kingdom of Macedoniawith a series of wars and astute treaties. He was murdered by oneof his bodyguards.
(2) Philip V (238 –178 bc ) King of Macedonia (220 –178 bc ).
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   119 28/05/2015   14:14120 glossary of proper names
Followed a successful expansionist policy until the Romans, who
had ﬁnally defeated the Carthaginians, turned their attention to
the threat he posed in 200 bc and comprehensively defeated him
in197 bc , conﬁning him within the borders of Macedonia.
philopoemen (253 –183 bc ) Greek statesman and general who
led the Achaean army on numerous occasions.
pitigliano, count of Seeorsini niccolo `.
pyrrhus (318 –272 bc ) King of Epirus, Pyrrhus was an ex-
tremely successful military commander and a constant threat to
the Romans in southern Italy and Sicily, where he also fought
the Carthaginians. His costly victory at the Battle of Asculum in
279 bc led to the use of the expression ‘Pyrrhic victory’.
romulus Legendary founder and ﬁrst king of Rome.
rouen, Cardinal of, later Archbishop of Georges d’Amboise
(1460 –1510). D’Amboise was already adviser to the Duke of
Orleans when the latter acceded to the French throne (1498) as
Louis XII. Louis at once made d’Amboise prime minister andpersuaded Alexander VI to appoint him as cardinal as part of amore general agreement between the two. D’Amboise encouragedLouis in his Italian adventures and drew on the support of CesareBorgia in an attempt to have himself elected pope on the deathof Borgia’s father Alexander VI.
rovere, giuliano de Seejulius ii.
san giorgio Cardinal Raffaello Riario of Savona.
san severino, ruberto da Mercenary commander who led
Venetian forces in 1482 and died ﬁghting for Venice in 1487.
saul First king of Israel, chosen by the people about 1025 bc .
savonarola, girolamo (1452 –98) Born in Ferrara, Savona-
rola studied philosophy and medicine before taking up a religiousvocation in the Dominican Order of friar preachers. He ﬁrst
preached in Florence between 1482 and1487 but was largely
ignored until, on the advice of the Humanist Pico della Miran-dola, Lorenzo de’ Medici recalled him to Florence to head the
inﬂuential monastery of San Marco in 1490. He then began a
cycle of sermons denouncing corruption in the town and proph-esying doom and foreign invasion. When Charles VIII invadedItaly in 1494 and the Medici ﬂed, his preaching appeared to be
vindicated and he became head of the Florentine government,glossary of proper names 121
leading the city as a theocracy from 1494 to1498 and encourag-
ing people to burn anything profane (books, paintings) on hisso-called Bonﬁre of the Vanities. His impassioned preachingagainst every form of corruption in the Church and his insistenceon a return to scriptural purity eventually led to his being excom-municated by Alexander VI, and when he lost support in Florencehe was arrested, tortured and burned at the stake in the town’scentral piazza.
scali, giorgio One of the leaders of the brieﬂy successful
Ciompi (wool-workers) rebellion in Florence in 1378. Involved
in an attempt to stop magistrates punishing a friend, he wasarrested and beheaded in 1382.
scipio Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus (c.234 –183 bc ). A
Roman general and statesman best known for his defeat of Hanni-bal at the Battle of Zama in 201 bc . This decisive victory won
him the name Africanus. Accused in the Senate of accepting bribesfrom enemies, he retired from Rome to his home on the coast ofCampania.
severus, lucius septimius (146 –211) Roman emperor
(193 –211), notorious for his militarization of Roman bureau-
cracy and the empire in general. After holding military commandsunder emperors Marcus Aurelius and Commodus, on the murderof the emperor Pertinax in 193he led his legions to Rome and
seized power. In 194 he defeated Pescennius Niger, who had
proclaimed himself emperor in the east, and in 196he defeated
another would-be emperor, Clodius Albinus, in Gaul. In the lastyears of his life he engaged in a long military campaign in Britain,dying in York in 211.
sforza, cardinal Ascanio Sforza (1455 –1505). Fifth child of
Francesco Sforza, Duke of Milan, and younger brother of Gal-eazzo and Ludovico who each in turn became duke. Appointedas cardinal in 1484, Ascanio made several fruitless attempts to
be elected pope. Acting as a spy for Milan in Rome, he wasdemoted by Alexander VI when Milan aided the French invasionof1494. Ascanio was subsequently reinstated but lost his power-
base when the French took Milan under Louis XII. He wasimprisoned by the French for three years before Georges
d’Amboise, Archbishop of Rouen and adviser to Louis, persuaded
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   120 28/05/2015   14:14120 glossary of proper names
Followed a successful expansionist policy until the Romans, who
had ﬁnally defeated the Carthaginians, turned their attention to
the threat he posed in 200 bc and comprehensively defeated him
in197 bc , conﬁning him within the borders of Macedonia.
philopoemen (253 –183 bc ) Greek statesman and general who
led the Achaean army on numerous occasions.
pitigliano, count of Seeorsini niccolo `.
pyrrhus (318 –272 bc ) King of Epirus, Pyrrhus was an ex-
tremely successful military commander and a constant threat to
the Romans in southern Italy and Sicily, where he also fought
the Carthaginians. His costly victory at the Battle of Asculum in
279 bc led to the use of the expression ‘Pyrrhic victory’.
romulus Legendary founder and ﬁrst king of Rome.
rouen, Cardinal of, later Archbishop of Georges d’Amboise
(1460 –1510). D’Amboise was already adviser to the Duke of
Orleans when the latter acceded to the French throne (1498) as
Louis XII. Louis at once made d’Amboise prime minister andpersuaded Alexander VI to appoint him as cardinal as part of amore general agreement between the two. D’Amboise encouragedLouis in his Italian adventures and drew on the support of CesareBorgia in an attempt to have himself elected pope on the deathof Borgia’s father Alexander VI.
rovere, giuliano de Seejulius ii.
san giorgio Cardinal Raffaello Riario of Savona.
san severino, ruberto da Mercenary commander who led
Venetian forces in 1482 and died ﬁghting for Venice in 1487.
saul First king of Israel, chosen by the people about 1025 bc .
savonarola, girolamo (1452 –98) Born in Ferrara, Savona-
rola studied philosophy and medicine before taking up a religiousvocation in the Dominican Order of friar preachers. He ﬁrst
preached in Florence between 1482 and1487 but was largely
ignored until, on the advice of the Humanist Pico della Miran-dola, Lorenzo de’ Medici recalled him to Florence to head the
inﬂuential monastery of San Marco in 1490. He then began a
cycle of sermons denouncing corruption in the town and proph-esying doom and foreign invasion. When Charles VIII invadedItaly in 1494 and the Medici ﬂed, his preaching appeared to be
vindicated and he became head of the Florentine government,glossary of proper names 121
leading the city as a theocracy from 1494 to1498 and encourag-
ing people to burn anything profane (books, paintings) on his
so-called Bonﬁre of the Vanities. His impassioned preachingagainst every form of corruption in the Church and his insistenceon a return to scriptural purity eventually led to his being excom-municated by Alexander VI, and when he lost support in Florencehe was arrested, tortured and burned at the stake in the town’scentral piazza.
scali, giorgio One of the leaders of the brieﬂy successful
Ciompi (wool-workers) rebellion in Florence in 1378. Involved
in an attempt to stop magistrates punishing a friend, he wasarrested and beheaded in 1382.
scipio Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus (c.234 –183 bc ). A
Roman general and statesman best known for his defeat of Hanni-bal at the Battle of Zama in 201 bc . This decisive victory won
him the name Africanus. Accused in the Senate of accepting bribesfrom enemies, he retired from Rome to his home on the coast ofCampania.
severus, lucius septimius (146 –211) Roman emperor
(193 –211), notorious for his militarization of Roman bureau-
cracy and the empire in general. After holding military commandsunder emperors Marcus Aurelius and Commodus, on the murderof the emperor Pertinax in 193he led his legions to Rome and
seized power. In 194 he defeated Pescennius Niger, who had
proclaimed himself emperor in the east, and in 196he defeated
another would-be emperor, Clodius Albinus, in Gaul. In the lastyears of his life he engaged in a long military campaign in Britain,dying in York in 211.
sforza, cardinal Ascanio Sforza (1455 –1505). Fifth child of
Francesco Sforza, Duke of Milan, and younger brother of Gal-eazzo and Ludovico who each in turn became duke. Appointedas cardinal in 1484, Ascanio made several fruitless attempts to
be elected pope. Acting as a spy for Milan in Rome, he wasdemoted by Alexander VI when Milan aided the French invasionof1494. Ascanio was subsequently reinstated but lost his power-
base when the French took Milan under Louis XII. He wasimprisoned by the French for three years before Georges
d’Amboise, Archbishop of Rouen and adviser to Louis, persuaded
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   121 28/05/2015   14:14122 glossary of proper names
the king to release him in the hope that Ascanio would support
his, Rouen’s, candidature for the papacy.
sforza, caterina Seeforli ´,countess of.
sforza, francesco (1401 –66) The most successful mercenary
commander of his century, Francesco frequently fought forFilippo Visconti, Duke of Milan (1412 –47). Visconti had no
sons and only one daughter, Bianca Maria, whom he offered inmarriage to Sforza to keep the powerful commander on Milan’s
side, frequently delaying the wedding so as to retain his bar-
gaining power. Having eventually married Bianca Maria in 1441,
Sforza expected to become duke on Visconti’s death in 1447, but
the people of Milan declared a republic. Sforza at ﬁrst served the
republic in a war against Venice, but then betrayed it and took
Milan for himself, becoming duke in 1450.
sforza, giacomo Giacomo (Muzio) Attendolo (1369 –1424).
Father of Francesco Sforza, who would become Duke of Milan.Joined the mercenary army of Alberigo da Barbiano in the 1380s
and received the nickname Sforza for his strength and determin-ation. Sforza served as mercenary commander for many Italianleaders and frequently found himself opposed to Braccio daMontone, who had also started his mercenary career underAlberigo da Barbiano. He was eventually killed in the service ofJoanna of Naples.
sforza, ludovico (1452 –1508) Second son of Francesco
Sforza, and Duke of Milan (1494 –1500). When Ludovico’s older
brother and duke, Galeazzo Maria, was assassinated in 1476,
power ofﬁcially passed to his seven-year-old son Gian Galeazzo,
but Ludovico seized control of the state and eventually becameduke when Gian Galeazzo died in 1494. Since Naples favoured
Gian Galeazzo’s attempt to regain his title, Ludovico supportedthe claim of Charles VIII to the Neapolitan throne and encouragedhis invasion of Italy in 1494. However, the extent of French
successes led him to join the League of Venice, an anti-Frenchalliance, which pushed Charles out of Italy. In 1499, Ludovico
lost Milan to Charles’s successor, Louis XII. He managed torecover the city brieﬂy in 1500 but was then defeated and
imprisoned by the French until his death in 1508. He is chieﬂy
remembered for his patronage of Leonardo da Vinci.glossary of proper names 123
sixtus Francesco della Rovere (1414 –84) was elected pope in
1471, taking the name of Sixtus IV. Sixtus was renowned for hisnepotism and in 1478 took part in the Pazzi conspiracy to topple
the Medici in Florence. Following the failed assassination attempton Lorenzo il Magniﬁco and the execution of the would-beassassins, Sixtus excommunicated Lorenzo, placed Florenceunder interdiction and, in alliance with Naples, declared war onthe town. Sixtus’s nephew, Giuliano della Rovere, would become
Pope Julius II in 1503.
soderini, piero (1450 –1522) Elected Gonfaloniere of
Florence and hence head of state for life in 1502, Soderini was a
friend of Machiavelli and promoted his career, but Machiavelli
found him indecisive and eventually lost respect for him. In linewith his predecessor, Savonarola, Soderini maintained an alliancewith France throughout his period of government, but he was notan able statesman and had no protection to fall back on once theFrench were driven out of Italy by the Holy League of papal,Spanish and imperial forces. In 1512 Soderini attempted to resist
Spanish forces at Prato, but had to ﬂee the city as the League’s
forces advanced and a Medici regime was reinstated.
theseus Legendary Greek hero, son of Aegeus, King of Athens.
He slew the Minotaur in the Cretan labyrinth and was the ﬁrst
lover of the adolescent Helen of Troy. He united the region of
Attica under the administration of Athens.
titus quintius Flaminius Titus Quintius (c.228 –174 bc ). A
Roman general who led the campaign against Philip V of
Macedonia. Titus defeated Philip at the battle of Cynoscephalaein Thessaly in 197. Philip was forced to retreat from all his Greek
possessions but his Macedonian kingdom was left intact.
venafro, antonio da Antonio Giordano (1459 –1530).
Having helped Pandolfo Petrucci become the ruler of Siena,Antonio was chosen as his ﬁrst minister and chief adviser and
was entrusted with important diplomatic missions to Rome andother courts. In 1502 he was at Magione when Cesare Borgia’s
mercenaries conspired to betray him. When Petrucci’s son,
Borghese, lost power in 1516, Antonio returned to his home town
of Venafro but later went to serve the government of Naples,
where he died.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   122 28/05/2015   14:14122 glossary of proper names
the king to release him in the hope that Ascanio would support
his, Rouen’s, candidature for the papacy.
sforza, caterina Seeforli ´,countess of.
sforza, francesco (1401 –66) The most successful mercenary
commander of his century, Francesco frequently fought forFilippo Visconti, Duke of Milan (1412 –47). Visconti had no
sons and only one daughter, Bianca Maria, whom he offered inmarriage to Sforza to keep the powerful commander on Milan’s
side, frequently delaying the wedding so as to retain his bar-
gaining power. Having eventually married Bianca Maria in 1441,
Sforza expected to become duke on Visconti’s death in 1447, but
the people of Milan declared a republic. Sforza at ﬁrst served the
republic in a war against Venice, but then betrayed it and took
Milan for himself, becoming duke in 1450.
sforza, giacomo Giacomo (Muzio) Attendolo (1369 –1424).
Father of Francesco Sforza, who would become Duke of Milan.Joined the mercenary army of Alberigo da Barbiano in the 1380s
and received the nickname Sforza for his strength and determin-ation. Sforza served as mercenary commander for many Italianleaders and frequently found himself opposed to Braccio daMontone, who had also started his mercenary career underAlberigo da Barbiano. He was eventually killed in the service ofJoanna of Naples.
sforza, ludovico (1452 –1508) Second son of Francesco
Sforza, and Duke of Milan (1494 –1500). When Ludovico’s older
brother and duke, Galeazzo Maria, was assassinated in 1476,
power ofﬁcially passed to his seven-year-old son Gian Galeazzo,
but Ludovico seized control of the state and eventually becameduke when Gian Galeazzo died in 1494. Since Naples favoured
Gian Galeazzo’s attempt to regain his title, Ludovico supportedthe claim of Charles VIII to the Neapolitan throne and encouragedhis invasion of Italy in 1494. However, the extent of French
successes led him to join the League of Venice, an anti-Frenchalliance, which pushed Charles out of Italy. In 1499, Ludovico
lost Milan to Charles’s successor, Louis XII. He managed torecover the city brieﬂy in 1500 but was then defeated and
imprisoned by the French until his death in 1508. He is chieﬂy
remembered for his patronage of Leonardo da Vinci.glossary of proper names 123
sixtus Francesco della Rovere (1414 –84) was elected pope in
1471, taking the name of Sixtus IV. Sixtus was renowned for his
nepotism and in 1478 took part in the Pazzi conspiracy to topple
the Medici in Florence. Following the failed assassination attempton Lorenzo il Magniﬁco and the execution of the would-beassassins, Sixtus excommunicated Lorenzo, placed Florenceunder interdiction and, in alliance with Naples, declared war onthe town. Sixtus’s nephew, Giuliano della Rovere, would become
Pope Julius II in 1503.
soderini, piero (1450 –1522) Elected Gonfaloniere of
Florence and hence head of state for life in 1502, Soderini was a
friend of Machiavelli and promoted his career, but Machiavelli
found him indecisive and eventually lost respect for him. In linewith his predecessor, Savonarola, Soderini maintained an alliancewith France throughout his period of government, but he was notan able statesman and had no protection to fall back on once theFrench were driven out of Italy by the Holy League of papal,Spanish and imperial forces. In 1512 Soderini attempted to resist
Spanish forces at Prato, but had to ﬂee the city as the League’s
forces advanced and a Medici regime was reinstated.
theseus Legendary Greek hero, son of Aegeus, King of Athens.
He slew the Minotaur in the Cretan labyrinth and was the ﬁrst
lover of the adolescent Helen of Troy. He united the region of
Attica under the administration of Athens.
titus quintius Flaminius Titus Quintius (c.228 –174 bc ). A
Roman general who led the campaign against Philip V of
Macedonia. Titus defeated Philip at the battle of Cynoscephalaein Thessaly in 197. Philip was forced to retreat from all his Greek
possessions but his Macedonian kingdom was left intact.
venafro, antonio da Antonio Giordano (1459 –1530).
Having helped Pandolfo Petrucci become the ruler of Siena,Antonio was chosen as his ﬁrst minister and chief adviser and
was entrusted with important diplomatic missions to Rome andother courts. In 1502 he was at Magione when Cesare Borgia’s
mercenaries conspired to betray him. When Petrucci’s son,
Borghese, lost power in 1516, Antonio returned to his home town
of Venafro but later went to serve the government of Naples,
where he died.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   123 28/05/2015   14:14124 glossary of proper names
visconti, Bernabo `(1323 –85) Ruled Milan together with two
brothers from 1354 to1385. Imprisoned and killed by his nephew
Gian Galeazzo Visconti.
visconti, filippo (1392 –1447) Duke of Milan (1412 –47).
Filippo was a cruel and paranoid manipulator who rebuilt the
Duchy of Milan with the services of mercenary leaders suchas Carmagnola and Francesco Sforza. To keep Sforza loyal, hepromised him his only child and heir, Bianca Maria, in marriage,
then made him wait many years for the wedding.
vitelli, niccolo `(1414 –86) Military commander in constant
battle with papal forces for the control of Citta `di Castello, a
town near Perugia, in Umbria. Forced out of the town by Sixtus
IV in 1475, he received support from the Medici after the failed
Pazzi conspiracy in which the pope had been involved. Onrecovering the town, he destroyed the fortresses that Sixtus hadbuilt in his absence.
vitelli, paulo (1461 –99) Son of Niccolo `Vitelli. A mercenary
commander who led the Florentine army in its siege of Pisa in1498. Having breached the walls, Paulo behaved with inexplic-able caution, failing to push home his advantage, as a result ofwhich he was suspected of treachery, arrested and executed.
vitelli, the Noble family of mercenary commanders who con-
trolled the town of Citta `di Castello, near Perugia in Umbria, for
most of the ﬁfteenth century.
vitellozzo Vitellozzo Vitelli (c.1458 –1502). Son of Niccolo `
and brother of Paulo, Vitellozzo was serving Florence with Paulowhen the latter was arrested and executed for treachery. Vitel-lozzo escaped and served Cesare Borgia. Together with the Orsinifaction, he conspired against Borgia and was among the conspira-tors killed in Senigallia in 1502.
xenophon (431 –354 bc ) An Athenian and friend of Socrates,
Xenophon was opposed to democracy and spent much of his lifein Sparta. He joined a group of 10,000 mercenaries who served
Cyrus during his campaign against Artaxerxes in Asia Minor in401. After Cyrus was killed, Xenophon was one of the generalswho led the mercenaries on their 1,000-mile retreat home (fewer
than 6,000 survived). He wrote about the campaign in Anabasis,
one of his many books..
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   124 28/05/2015   14:14124 glossary of proper names
visconti, Bernabo `(1323 –85) Ruled Milan together with two
brothers from 1354 to1385. Imprisoned and killed by his nephew
Gian Galeazzo Visconti.
visconti, filippo (1392 –1447) Duke of Milan (1412 –47).
Filippo was a cruel and paranoid manipulator who rebuilt the
Duchy of Milan with the services of mercenary leaders suchas Carmagnola and Francesco Sforza. To keep Sforza loyal, hepromised him his only child and heir, Bianca Maria, in marriage,
then made him wait many years for the wedding.
vitelli, niccolo `(1414 –86) Military commander in constant
battle with papal forces for the control of Citta `di Castello, a
town near Perugia, in Umbria. Forced out of the town by Sixtus
IV in 1475, he received support from the Medici after the failed
Pazzi conspiracy in which the pope had been involved. Onrecovering the town, he destroyed the fortresses that Sixtus hadbuilt in his absence.
vitelli, paulo (1461 –99) Son of Niccolo `Vitelli. A mercenary
commander who led the Florentine army in its siege of Pisa in1498. Having breached the walls, Paulo behaved with inexplic-able caution, failing to push home his advantage, as a result ofwhich he was suspected of treachery, arrested and executed.
vitelli, the Noble family of mercenary commanders who con-
trolled the town of Citta `di Castello, near Perugia in Umbria, for
most of the ﬁfteenth century.
vitellozzo Vitellozzo Vitelli (c.1458 –1502). Son of Niccolo `
and brother of Paulo, Vitellozzo was serving Florence with Paulowhen the latter was arrested and executed for treachery. Vitel-lozzo escaped and served Cesare Borgia. Together with the Orsinifaction, he conspired against Borgia and was among the conspira-tors killed in Senigallia in 1502.
xenophon (431 –354 bc ) An Athenian and friend of Socrates,
Xenophon was opposed to democracy and spent much of his lifein Sparta. He joined a group of 10,000 mercenaries who served
Cyrus during his campaign against Artaxerxes in Asia Minor in401. After Cyrus was killed, Xenophon was one of the generalswho led the mercenaries on their 1,000-mile retreat home (fewer
than 6,000 survived). He wrote about the campaign in Anabasis,
one of his many books..
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   125 28/05/2015   14:14. .
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   126 28/05/2015   14:14. .
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   127 28/05/2015   14:14. .
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   128 28/05/2015   14:14. .
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   129 28/05/2015   14:14.
9780141442259_ThePrince_TXT.indd   130 28/05/2015   14:14